THE SPORTS (DEVELOPMENT AND CONTROL) ORDINANCE, 1962 CONTENTS 1. Short title, extent and commencement 2. Definitions 3. Establishment of the Board 4. Name, Constitution, powers and functions of a Board 5. Exclusive right to make rules for the development, control and uniformity of Sports throughout Pakistan THE SPORTS (DEVELOPMENT AND CONTROL) ORDINANCE, 1962 ORDINANCE N0. XVI OF 1962 [2nd May, 1962] An Ordinance to regulate the development and control of Sports WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the development and control of Sports in Pakistan; NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the seventh day of October, 1958, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance: PART I 1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Ordinance shall be called the Sports (Development and Control) Ordinance, 1962. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions. In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, (i) “Sports” shall include Hockey, Football, Athletics, Wrestling, Cricket, Weight-lifting, Squash Rackets, Swimming, Boxing, Cycling, Basketball, Golf, Volleyball, Rifle Shooting, Table Tennis, Badminton, Lawn Tennis, Polo, Racing, Body-Building, Skiing, Mountaineering, and any other activity which the 1[Federal Government] may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify. (ii) “Board” means a Board constituted under this Ordinance, for the control of Sports in Pakistan. PART II 3. Establishment of the Board. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Ordinance, the 1[Federal Government] may, for the purposes of promoting and developing uniform standards of competition in Sports in Pakistan comparable to the standards prevailing internationally, and regulating and controlling sports in Pakistan on a national basis, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute, one or more boards for the control of Sports in Pakistan. (2) A Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable. 1Subs. by F.A.O., 1975. 4. Name, Constitution, powers and functions of a Board. The name, Constitution, powers and functions of a Board shall be such as may be determined by the 1[Federal Government]. 5. Exclusive right to make rules for the development, control and uniformity of Sports throughout Pakistan. A Board may make rules and regulations for carrying its objects into effect. RGN  1Subs. by F.A.O., 1975.