THE QUAID-E-AZAM UNIVERSITY ACT, 1973 CONTENTS 1. Short title and commencement. 2. Definitions. CHAPTER II. THE UNIVERSITY 3. Incorporation. 4. Powers of the University. 5. University open to all classes, creeds, etc. 6. Teaching in the University. 7. [Omitted]. CHAPTER III. OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 8. Officers of the University. 9. Chancellor. 10. Visitation. 11. Pro-Chancellor. 12. Vice-Chancellor. 13. Powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor. 14. Registrar. 15. Treasurer. 16. Controller of Examinations. 17. University Auditors. CHAPTER IV. AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY 18. Authorities. 19. [Omitted]. 20. [Omitted]. 21. The Syndicate. 22. Powers and duties of Syndicate. 23. Academic Council. 24. Powers and duties of Academic Council. 25. Constitution, functions and powers of other Authorities. 26. Appointment of Committees by the Authorities. CHAPTER V. STATUTES, REGULATIONS AND RULES 27. Statutes. 28. Regulations. 29. Amendment and repeal of Statutes and Regulations. 30. Rules. CHAPTER V A. AFFILIATION OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 30 A. Affiliation to be approved by Syndicate. 30 B. Application for affiliation. 30 C. Grant of affiliation. 30 D. Extension of affiliation. 30 E. Inspection and report. 30 F. Disaffiliation. 30 G. Appeal against decision of Syndicate. CHAPTER VI. UNIVERSITY FUND 31. University Fund. 32 Audit and Accounts CHAPTER VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS 33. Opportunity to show cause. 34. Appeal to and review by the Syndicate. 35. Pension, Insurance, gratuity, provident Fund and benevolent fund. 36. Commencement of term of office of members of Authorities. 36 A. Member of an Authority to cease to be member in certain circumstances. 37. Filling of casual vacancies in Authorities. 38. Filling of vacancies in Authorities in certain circumstances. 39. Disputes about membership of Authorities. 40. Proceedings of Authorities not invalidated by vacancies. 41. First Statutes. 42. [Omitted]. 43. [Omitted]. 43A. Tripartite mobility. 44. Removal of difficulties. 44A. Dissolution of Association or Unions of the University Employees. 45 [Omitted]. THE SCHEDULE THE FIRST STATUTES THE 2[QUAID-E-AZAM UNIVERSITY ACT, 1973] 1ACT NO. XXVIII OF 1973 [9th February, 1973] An Act to reconstitute and reorganize the University of Islamabad. WHEREAS it is expedient to reconstitute and reorganize the University of Islamabad for the purpose of improving its administration; It is hereby enacted as follows:- 1. Short title and commencement.-(1) This Act may be called the 2[Quaid-e-Azam University Act, 1973]. (2) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University; 3[(aa) “affiliated college” means an educational institution affiliated to, but not maintained or administered by, the University;] (b) “Authority” means an Authority of the University specified in section 18; (c) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University; 3[(cc) “College” means a constituent college or an affiliated college;] (d) “constituent college “ means a college maintained and administered by the University; (e) “Dean” means the Chairman of the Board of a Faculty; (f) “Director” means the head of an Institute; (g) “educational institution” means an institution imparting instruction in a subject or subjects relating to a Faculty; (h) “Faculty” means a Faculty of the University; (i) “Government” means the Federal Government; (j) “Institute” means a constituent institute maintained and administered by the University; (k) “prescribed” means prescribed by Statutes, Regulations or Rules; 1For Statement of Objects and Reasons see Gaz. of P., 1973. Ext., Pt. Ill, p. 251. 2Subs. by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act, 1976, (60 of 1976) s. 2, for “University of Islamabad Act, 1973.” 3Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 2. (l) “Principal” means the head of a 1* * * college; (m) “Pro-Chancellor” means the Pro­Chancellor of the University; 2* * * * * * * (n) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice­Chancellor of the University; (o) “Registered graduate” means a graduate of the University who has his name entered in the register maintained for the purpose; 3* * * * * * * (q) “Statutes”, “Regulations” and “Rules” means the Statutes, Regulations and Rules made or deemed to have been made under this Act and for the time being in force; (r) “Syndicate” means the Syndicate of the University; (s) “Teachers” include Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and Lecturers engaged whole-time by the University or by a constituent college for teaching honours or post-graduate classes, and such other persons as may be declared to be Teachers by the Regulations; (t) “Teaching Department” means a teaching department maintained and administred or recognized by the University; 4[(u) “University” means the Quaid-e-Azam University as renamed under this Act;] (v) “University Teacher” means a whole-time Teacher appointed and paid by the University, or recognized by the University as such. CHAPTER II THE UNIVERSITY 3.Incorporation.-5[(1) The University of Islamabad as reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and having its principal seat at Islamabad shall, on and from the commencement of the University of Islamabad (Amendment) Act, 1976 (XIV of 1976), be renamed as 'the Quaid­e­Azam University’.] 1Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 2. 2Cl (mm) omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance. 1980 (I of 1981), s. 2. 3CI. (p) omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance. 1985 (31 of 1985). s. 2. 4Subs by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Acl. 1976 (60 of 1976). s. 3 for “clause (u)”. 5Subs by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (60 of 1976), s. 4, for “sub-section (1)”. (2) The University shall consist of- (i) The Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, 1* * * the Deans, the Principals, the Directors, the Chairmen of Teaching Departments, the Registrar, the Treasurer, the Controller of Examinations, the Librarian, the Auditor and such other officers as may be prescribed; (ii) members of 2* * the Syndicate, the Academic Council and other Authorities of the University; (iii) all University Teachers; and (iv) Professors Emeritus. (3) The University shall be a body corporate by the name of the 3[Quaid-e-Azam University] and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (4) The University shall be competent to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable and immovable property which may have become vested in or been acquired by it. 4. Powers of the University.-The University shall have the powers- (a) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as it may deem fit, and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge in such manner as it may determine; (b) to prescribe courses of studies to be conducted by it and the 4* colleges; (c) to hold examinations and to award and confer degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions to and on persons who have been admitted to and have passed its examinations under prescribed conditions; (d) to confer in the manner prescribed honorary degrees or other distinctions on persons approved for the purpose; (e) to provide for such instruction for persons not being students of the University as it may determine, and to grant certificates and diplomas to such persons; (f) to confer degrees on persons who have carried on independent research under prescribed conditions; 5[(ff) to grant affiliation to an educational institution and to withdraw such affiliation;] (g) to inspect colleges and other educational institutions associated 6[with or affiliated to, seeking association with or affiliation to, it]; 1 The words “the Pro-Vice Chancellor” which was inserted by Act 60 of 1976, have been omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (1 of 1981), s. 3. 2 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s.3. 3 Subs. by Act 60 of 1976, s. 3 for “University of Islamabad”. 4 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 3. 5 Ins. ibid., 6 Subs., ibid for certain words. (h) to accept the examinations passed, and the periods of study spent, by students of the University at other universities and places of learning as equivalent to such examinations and periods of study in the University as it may determine, and to withdraw such acceptance; (i) to co-operate with other universities and authorities in such manner and for such purposes as it may determine; (j) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and Lecturerships and any other posts and to appoint persons thereto; (k) to create posts for research, extensions, administration and other related purposes and to appoint persons thereto; (l) to recognize as University Teachers such persons as it may deem fit; (m) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, medals and prizes under prescribed conditions; (n) to establish teaching departments, colleges, faculties, laboratories, workshops, hospitals, farms, institutes, museums and other centres of learning for the development of teaching and research and to make such arrangements for their maintenance, management and administration as it may determine; (o) to control the residence of the students of the University and the constituent colleges, to institute and maintain halls of residence and to approve or license hostels and lodgings; (p) to supervise and control the discipline of the students of the University and the constituent colleges, to promote the extra-curricular and recreational activities of such students, and to make arrangements for promoting their health general and welfare; (q) to demand and receive such fees and other charges as it may determine; (r) to make provision for research and advisory services and with these objects to enter into arrangements with other institutions or with public bodies under prescribed conditions; (s) to enter into, carry out, vary or cancel contracts; (t) to receive and manage property transferred and grants bequests, trusts, gifts, donations, endowments and other contributions made to the University and to invest any fund representing such property, grants, bequests, trusts, gifts, donations, endowments or contributions and to convert one kind of property into another, in such manner as it may deem fit; (u) to provide for the printing and publication of research and other works; and (v) to do all such other acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be requisite in order to further the objects of the University as a place of education, learning and research. 5. University open to all classes, creeds, etc.-The University shall be open to all persons of either sex of whatever religion, race, creed, class or colour and no citizen of Pakistan shall be denied the privileges of the University on the ground only of sex, religion, race, caste, creed, class or colour: Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent religious instruction being given to the students in their own religious faiths in such manner as may be prescribed. 6. Teaching in the University.-(1) All recognized teaching in various courses shall be conducted by the University or the constituent colleges in the prescribed manner and may include lectures, tutorials, discussions, seminars, demonstrations as well as practical work in the laboratories, hospitals, workshops and farms and other methods of instruction. (2) The authority responsible for organizing recognised teaching shall be such as may be prescribed. (3) The courses and the curricula shall be such as may be prescribed. 7. [University Students Union.] Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (XXXI of 1985), s.4. CHAPTER III OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 8. Officers of the University.-The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:- (i) the Chancellor; (ii) the Pro­Chancellor; (iii) the Vice­Chancellor; 1* * * * * * * (iv) the Deans; (v) the Directors; (vi) the Principals 2[of constituent colleges]; (vii) the Chairmen of the Teaching Departments; (viii) the Registrar; (ix) the Treasurer; (x) the Controller of Examinations; (xi) the Librarian; and (xii) such other persons as may be prescribed by the Regulations to be officers. 1New clause (iiia) ins. by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act. 1976 (60 of 1976), s. 6. omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance. 1981 (I of 1981). s. 4. 2Added by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 4. 9. Chancellor.-(1) The President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan shall be the Chancellor of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall, when present, preside at the convocation of the University 1* * *. (3) If the Chancellor is satisfied that the proceedings of any Authority are not in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, the Regulations, or the Rules, he may, after calling upon such Authority to show cause why such proceedings should not be annulled, by order in writing, annul the proceedings. (4) Every proposal to confer an honorary degree shall be subject to confirmation by the Chancellor. (5) The Chancellor shall have the powers to assent to such Statutes as are required to be submitted to him by the 1[Syndicate] or withhold assent or refer them back to the 1[Syndicate] for reconsideration. (6) The Chancellor may remove any person from the membership of any Authority, if such person- (i) has become of unsound mind; or (ii) has become subject to an incapacity which prevents him from functioning as a member of such Authority; or (iii) has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude. 10. Visitation.-(1) The Chancellor may cause an inspection or inquiry to be made in respect of any matter connected with the affairs of the University and shall, from time to time, appoint such person or persons as he may deem fit for the purpose of carrying out inspection of- (i) the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipment; (ii) any institution, college or hostel maintained, recognized or licensed by the University; 2[(ii-A) any affiliated college;] (iii) the teaching and other work conducted by the University; and (iv) the conduct of examinations held by the University. (2) The Chancellor shall give notice to the Syndicate of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made under sub-section (1), and the Syndicate shall be entitled to be represented thereat. (3) The Chancellor shall communicate to the Syndicate his views with regard to the results of an inspection or inquiry made under sub-section (1) and shall, after ascertaining the views of the Syndicate thereon, advise the Syndicate on the action to be taken by it. 1 Omitted and Subs by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 5. 2 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 5. (4) The Syndicate shall, within such time as may be specified by the Chancellor, communicate to him such action, if any, as has been taken or may be proposed to be taken upon the results of an inspection or inquiry communicated to it under sub-section (3). (5) Where the Syndicate does not, within the time specified by the Chancellor, take action to the satisfaction of the Chancellor he may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Syndicate, issue such directions as he thinks fit, and the Vice-Chancellor shall comply with such directions. 11. Pro-Chancellor.-(1) The Minister for Education of the Government of Pakistan shall be the Pro-Chancellor of the University, ex-officio. (2) In the absence of the Chancellor from the Capital of the Federation or during the Chancellor's inability to act or when the Chancellor so directs, the Pro-Chancellor shall exercise all powers and perform all functions of the Chancellor. 12. Vice-Chancellor.-(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor on such terms and conditions as the Chancellor may determine and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Chancellor for a term not exceeding four years. (2) At any time when the office of the Vice-Chancellor is vacant, or the Vice-Chancellor is absent or is unable to perform the functions of his office due to illness or some other cause, the Chancellor shall make such arrangement for the performance of the duties of the Vice-Chancellor as he may deem fit. 13. Powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor.-(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University, shall ensure that the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, the Regulations and the Rules are faithfully observed in order to promote the general efficiency and good order of the University, and shall have all powers necessary for this purpose, including administrative control over all officers, teachers and other employees of the University. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall, in the absence of both the Chancellor and Pro-Chancellor, preside at a convocation of the University 1* * * and shall, if present, preside at the meetings of the Authorities of which he is the Chairman and be entitled to attend and preside at any meeting of any other Authority or body of the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor may, in an emergency which in his opinion requires immediate action, take such action as he may consider necessary and shall, as soon thereafter as possible, report his action 1* * to the officer, Authority or other body which in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall also have the powers- (i) to create and fill temporary post, in consultation with the Dean of the Faculty concerned, for a period not exceeding six months; (ii) to sanction all expenditure provided for in the approved budget, and to re­appropriate funds within the same major head of expenditure; 1Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 6. (iii) to sanction by re-appropriation an amount not exceeding five thousand rupees for an unforeseen item not provided for in the budget, and report it to the Syndicate at the next meeting; (iv) to appoint paper-setters and examiners for all examinations of the University after receiving panels of names from the relevant Authorities; (v) to make such arrangements for the scrutiny of papers, marks and results as he may consider necessary; (vi) to direct teachers, officers and other employees of the University to take up such assignments in connection with teaching, research, examination and administration, and such other activities in the University as he may consider necessary for the purpose of the University; (vii) to delegate, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed, any of his powers under this Act to an officer or other employee of the University; (viii) to appoint employees on an initial monthly pay which is below four hundred and fifty rupees; and (ix) to exercise and perform such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. 13A. [Pro-Vice Chancellor.] Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (I of 1981), s. 5. 14. Registrar.-(1) The Registrar shall be whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Syndicate on such terms and conditions as it may determine. (2) The Registrar shall- (a) be the custodian of the Common Seal and the academic records of the University; (b) maintain a Register of Registered graduates in the prescribed manner; (c) conduct elections of members to the various Authorities in the prescribed manner; and (d) perform such other duties as may be prescribed 15. Treasurer.-(1) The Treasurer shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor on such terms and conditions as the Chancellor may determine. (2) The Treasurer shall- (a) manage the property, the finances and the investments of the University; (b) prepare the annual and revised budget estimates of the University and present them to the Finance and Planning Committee, 1[ and the Syndicate]; (c) ensure that the funds of the University are expended for the purposes for which they are provided; and (d) perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 16. Controller of Examinations.-(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Syndicate on such terms and conditions as it may determine. 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985) s. 7. (2) The Controller of Examinations shall be responsible for all matters connected with the conduct of examinations and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 17. University Auditor.-(1) There shall be a University Auditor who shall be an officer in the service of Government whose services have been lent to the University. (2) The duties of the University Auditor shall include pre-audit of all bills and demands for payment submitted to the University. CHAPTER IV AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERRSITY 18. Authorities.-The following shall be the Authorities of the University, namely:- 1* * * * * * * (ii) the Syndicate; (iii) the Academic Council; (iv) the Boards of Faculties; (v) the Boards of Studies; (vi) the Selection Board; (vii) the advanced Studies and Research Board; 2[(vii-A) the Affiliation Committee]. (viii) the Finance and Planning Committee; (ix) the Discipline Committee; and (x) such other authorities as may be prescribed by Statutes. 19. [The Senate.] Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (XXXI of 1985), s. 8. 20. [Powers and duties of the Senate.] Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (XXXI of 1985), s. 9. 21. The Syndicate.-3[(1) The Syndicate shall consist of- (i) The Vice­Chancellor, who shall be its Chairman; (ii) One member of the National Assembly to be nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly; 4* * * * * * * (iv) The Chief Justice of Pakistan or 5[a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan nominated by him;] (v) The Secretary, Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan. (vi) One nominee of the University Grants Commission; (vii) One Dean to be nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice­ Chancellor; 1 CI. (i) omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam university(Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985(31 of 1985), S.8. 2 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978], s. 6. 3 Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1980 (1 of 1981), s. 7. 4 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 10. 5 Subs. ibid., for “certain words.” 1[(viii) One professor to be elected by the Professors of the University from amongst themselves; (viiia) One Associate Professor to be elected by the Associate Professors of the University from amongst themselves,]. (ix) Three persons of eminence to be nominated by the Chancellor; (x) One principal of an affiliated college to be nominated by the chancellor; 2* 3* * * * * * * 4[(xii) One Aalim to be nominated by the Chancellor ; and (xiii) One woman to be nominated by the Chancellor.]] (2) The members of the Syndicate, other than ex-officio members, shall hold office for 5[three] years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Syndicate shall be one half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. 22. Powers and duties of Syndicate.-(1) The Syndicate shall be the executive body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, exercise general supervision over the affairs and management of the property of the University. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Syndicate shall have the power- (a) to hold, control and administer the property and funds of the University; (b) to govern and regulate, with due regard to the advice of the Finance and Planning Committee in this behalf, the finances, accounts and investments of the University and, for that purpose, to appoint such agents as it may think fit; (c) to consider the annual report and the annual and revised budget estimates and 6[approve the same] and to re-appropriate funds from one major head of expenditure to another; (d) to transfer and accept transfer of movable or immovable property on behalf of the University; (e) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University; 1 Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 10. 2 Oniitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (7 of 1981),s. 2. 3 Omitted by Ord. 31 of 1985 s. 10. 4 Added by Ord. 7 of 1981, s. 2. 5 Subs. ibid. for “two” which was subs. by Ordinance I of 1981, s. 7. 6 Subs. by Ordinance 31 of 1985. s. 11. (f) to cause proper books of account to be kept for all sums of money received and expended by the University and for the assets and liabilities of the University; (g) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in any of the securities described in section 20 of the Trusts Act, 1882 (II of 1882), or in the purchase of immovable property or in such other manner as it may determine, with the like power of varying such investment; (h) to receive and manage any property transferred and grants, bequests, trusts, gifts donations, endowments and other contributions, made to the University, and to administer any funds placed at the disposal of the University for specified purposes; (i) to determine the form, provide for the custody and regulate the use of the Common Seal of the University; (j) to provide the buildings, libraries, premises, furniture, apparatus, equipment and other means required for the purposes of the University, and to establish and maintain halls of residence and hostels or approve or license hostels or lodgings for the residence of students; (k) to arrange for the inspection of the 1* colleges and the Teaching Departments and Institutes; (l) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships, Lecturerships and other teaching posts, or to suspend or abolish such posts; (m) to create, suspend or abolish such administrative, research, extension or other posts as may be necessary; (n) to appoint University Teachers and other officers on the recommendations of the Selection Board for Teaching and other posts on an initial monthly pay which is not below four hundred and fifty rupees; (o) to appoint Professors Emeritus on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed; (p) to confer with the prior approval of the Chancellor Honorary Degrees in accordance with the conditions prescribed; (q) to prescribe the duties of Officers, Teachers and other employees of the University; (r) to suspend, punish and remove from service in the prescribed manner officers (other than the Vice-Chancellor 2* * * and the Treasurer), Teachers and other employees whom it is empowered to appoint; 3* * * * * * * 1 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 8. 2 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (1 of 1981), s. 8. 3 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 11. (t) to appoint members to the various Authorities in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 1[(u) to frame and approve the Statutes]. (v) to consider, and deal in the manner prescribed in sub-section (2) of section 28 with, the Regulations made by the Academic Council; (w) to regulate, determine and administer all other matters concerning the University and to this end exercise all necessary powers not specifically mentioned in this Act and the Statutes; (x) to delegate any of its powers to an Authority or officers or a Committee or sub- committee; 2[(x-a) to advise the Chancellor on the grant of affiliation to an educational institution and the withdrawal of such affiliation; and] (y) to perform such other functions as have been assigned to it by the other provisions of this Act or may be assigned to it by the Statutes. 23. Academic Council.-(1) The Academic Council shall consist of- (i) the Vice­Chancellor, who shall be its Chairman; 3* * * * * * * (ii) the Secretary, Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan; (iii) the Deans; (iv) the Directors of institutes; (v) the Principals; (vi) the University Professors and Professors Emeritus ; (vii) the Chairman of the Teaching Departments; (viii) four Associate Professors, not being Chairmen of the Teaching Departments, to be elected by the Associate Professors; (ix) four Assistant Professors and Lecturers to be elected by the Assistant Professors and Lecturers; (x) four teachers of constituent colleges, having at least five years experience of teaching in a Degree College, elected from amongst themselves; 1 Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt) Ordinance, 1985(31 of 1985) S.11 for sub-clause “(u)”. 2 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 8. 3 New clause (ia) ins. by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (60 of 1976), s. 11, have been omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981, (I of 1981), s.7. 1[(x-a) two Professors of affiliated colleges, having at least five years experience of teaching in a Degree College, elected from amongst themselves;] (xi) three persons eminent in the arts, the sciences and the professions, of whom one shall be from each category, to be nominated by the Chancellor; (xii) the Registrar; (xiii) the Librarian; (xiv) the Controller of Examinations. (2) Members appointed by nomination or election shall hold office for three years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council shall be one-third of the total number of members, fractions being counted as one. 24. Powers and duties of Academic Council.-(1) The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, have the power to lay down proper standards of instruction, research and examinations and to regulate and promote the academic life of the University and the 2* colleges. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Academic Council shall have the power- (a) to advise the Syndicate on academic matters; (b) to regulate the conduct of teaching, research, and examinations; (c) to regulate the admission of students to the courses of studies and examinations in the University; (d) to regulate the conduct and discipline of the students of the University; (e) to propose to the Syndicate schemes for the constitution and organisation of Faculties, Teaching Departments, Institutes and Boards of Studies; (f) to consider and formulate proposals for the planning and development of teaching and research in the University; (g) to make Regulations, on the recommendations of the Boards of Faculties and the Boards of Studies Prescribing the courses of studies and the syllabi for all University examinations: Provided that, if the recommendations of a Board of Faculty or a Board of Studies, are not received by the prescribed date, the Academic Council may, subject to the approval of the Syndicate, continue for the next year the courses of studies already prescribed for an examination; (h) to recognize the examinations of other Universities or examining bodies as equivalent to the corresponding examinations of the University; 1 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance 1978 (26 of 1978), s.10. 2 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 7. (i) to regulate the award of studentships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (j) to frame Regulations for submission to the Syndicates; and (k) to appoint members to the various Authorities in accordance with the provisions of this Act; and (l) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Statutes. 25. Constitution, functions and powers of other Authorities.-Subject to the provision of this Act, the constitution, functions and powers of the Authorities for which no specific provision, or insufficient provision, has been made in this Act shall be such as may be prescribed by Statutes. 26. Appointment of Committees by the Authorities.-The 1* * Syndicate, the Academic Council and any other Authority may, from time to time, appoint such standing special or advisory committees, as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such committees persons who are not its members. CHAPTER V STATUTES, REGULATIONS AND RULES 27. Statutes.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, Statutes may be made to regulate or prescribe all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the constitution of pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund for University employees; (b) the scales of pay and other terms and conditions of service of officers, Teachers and other employees of the University; (c) the maintenance of the Register of Registered Graduates; (d) admission of educational institutions to the privileges of the University and the withdrawal of such privileges; (e) the conduct of elections for membership of the Authorities and related matters; (f) the establishment of Faculties, Institutes, Colleges and other academic divisions; (g) the powers and duties of officers and Teachers; (h) the conditions under which the University may enter into arrangements with other institutions or with public bodies for purposes of research and advisory services; (i) the conditions for appointment of Professors Emeritus and award of honorary degrees; (j) efficiency and discipline of University employees; and (k) all other matters which are to be or may be prescribed or regulated by statutes. 1Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 12. 1[(2) The Syndicate shall frame and approve the Statutes: Provided that the Syndicate shall not approve statutes affecting the constitution or powers of any Authority, until such Authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing upon the proposals: Provided further that the  of Statutes concerning any of the matters mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) shall be forwarded to the Chancellor and shall not be effective until it has been approved by the Chancellor. (3) The Chancellor may, of his own motion, frame and approve Statutes concerning any of the matters mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1).] 28. Regulations.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, Regulations may be made for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the general scheme of studies including the duration of courses and the number of subjects or papers for an examination; (b) the courses of study for degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University; (c) the manner in which the recognised teaching referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6 shall be organized and conducted; (d) the admission of students to the University; (e) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the courses and the examinations of the University and shall become eligible for the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates; (f) the conduct of examinations; (g) fees and other charges to be paid by the students for admission to the courses of study and the examinations of the University; (h) the conduct and discipline of students of the University; (i) conditions of residence of the students of the University or the constituent colleges, including the levying of fees for residence in halls of residence and hostels; (j) the approval and licensing of hostels and lodgings for students; (k) the conditions under which a person shall carry on independent research to entitle him to a degree; (l) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (m) the institution of stipends and free and half­free studentships; (n) the academic costume; (o) the use of the Library; 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985). s. 13. (p) the formation of Teaching Department, Institutes and Boards of Studies; and (q) all other matters which are to be or may be prescribed by Regulations. (2) The  of Regulations shall be prepared by the Academic Council and shall be submitted to the Syndicate which may approve or withhold approval or refer it back to the Academic Council for reconsideration: Provided that the Syndicate may frame a Regulation at its own initiative and approve it after calling for the advice of the Academic Council. (3) No Regulation shall be valid unless it has been approved by the Syndicate. 29. Amendment and repeal of Statutes and Regulations.-The procedure for adding to, amending or repealing the Statutes and the Regulations shall be the same as that provided respectively for the framing or making of Statutes and Regulations. 30. Rules.-(1) The Authorities and the other bodies of the University may make rules consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Regulations to regulate the conduct of their business and the time and place of meetings and related matters: Provided that the Syndicate may direct the amendment or the annulment of any rules made by another Authority or body 1* * * under this section: Provided further that, if such other Authority or body is dissatisfied with such direction, it may 2[apply for review to the Syndicate] whose decision in the matter shall be final. (2) The Syndicate may make rules to regulate any matter relating to the affairs of the University, which by this Act is not specifically required to be provided for by statutes or Regulations. 3[CHAPTER V-A AFFILIATION OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 30-A. Affiliation to be approved by Syndicate.- No educational institution shall be granted affiliation to, or admitted to the privileges of, the University except with the approval of the Syndicate and the Chancellor. 30-B. Application for Affiliation.-(1) An educational institution applying for affiliation to the University shall make an application to the University and shall satisfy it- (a) that the educational institution is under the management of a Government or of a regularly constituted governing body; (b) that the financial resources of the educational institution are such as to enable it to make due provision for its continued maintenance and efficient working; (c) that the strength and qualifications of the teaching and other staff, and the terms and conditions of their service, are adequate to make the provision for the courses of instructions, teaching or training to be undertaken by the educational institution; 1 Omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 14. 2 Subs. ibid., s. 15. 3 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 11. (d) that the educational institution has framed proper rules regarding the efficiency and discipline of its staff and other employees; (e) that the building in which the educational institution is to be located is suitable, and that provision will be made in conformity with the Statues and the Regulations for- (i) the residence of students, not residing with their parents or guardians, in the hostels established and maintained by the educational institution or in hostels or lodgings approved by it; and (ii) the supervision and physical and general welfare of students; (f) that provision has been made for a library and adequate library services; (g) that, where affiliation is sought in any branch of experimental sciences, due arrangements have been made for imparting instruction in that branch of science in a properly equipped laboratory, museum and other places of practical work; (h) that due provision will, so far as circumstances may permit, be made for the residence of its Principal and members of the teaching staff in or near the educational institution or the place provided for the residence of students; and (i) that the affiliation of the educational institution will not be injurious to the interests of education or discipline of any other educational institution in its neighbourhood. (2) The Application shall further contain an undertaking that, after the educational institution is affiliated, any transference of, and charges in, the management and in the teaching staff, save in the case of Government colleges, shall forthwith be reported to the University, and that the teaching staff shall posses such qualifications as are, and may be, prescribed. 30C. Grant of affiliation.-The Syndicate may, after considering the report of the Affiliation Committee, grant or refuse to grant affiliation to an educational institution, and if it grants affiliation, it shall advise the Chancellor to assent to it: Provided that affiliation shall not be refused unless the educational institution has been given an opportunity to show cause why affiliation should not be refused on the grounds to be given in writing. 30D. Extension of affiliation. Where an educational institution desires to add to the courses of instruction in respect of which it is affiliated, the procedure prescribed for affiliation of educational institutions shall, so far as may be, be followed. 30E. Inspection and report.-(1) Every educational institution affiliated to the University shall furnish such reports, returns and other information as the University may require to enable it to judge the efficiency of the educational institution. (2) The University shall cause every such educational institution to be inspected from time to time by one or more competent persons authorized by it in this behalf. (3) The University may call upon any educational institution affiliated to it to take, within a specified period, such action as may appear to the University to be necessary in respect of any of the matters referred to in sub-section (1) of section 30B. 30F. Disaffiliation.-(1) If an educational institution affiliated to the University has failed to observe any of the conditions of its affiliations, or its affairs are conducted in a manner which is prejudicial to the interests of education, the rights conferred on the educational institution by affiliation may, on a report made by the Affiliation Committee and with the approval of the Syndicate and the sanction of the Chancellor, be withdrawn in whole or in part or modified: Provided that the syndicate may, on a report of the affiliation committee, and after considering such representation as the educational institution may wish to make, restore to it such rights either in whole or in part. (2) The procedure to be followed for the withdrawal of affiliation shall be such as may be prescribed. 30G. Appeal against decision of Syndicate.-An appeal shall lie to the 1[Chancellor] against the decision of the Syndicate refusing to affiliate an educational institution, or withdrawing in whole or in part, the rights conferred on such institution by affiliation, or against modification of such rights.]. CHAPTER VI UNIVERSITY FUND 31. University Fund.-The University shall have a fund to which shall be credited its income from fees, donations, trusts, bequests, endowments, contribution, grants and all other sources. 32. Audit and accounts.-(1) The accounts of the University shall be maintained in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) No expenditure shall be made from the funds of the University 2[if it is not included in the approved budget of the university nor] unless a bill for its payment has been audited by the University Auditor in conformity with the Statutes, the Regulations and the rules. (3) The annual statement of the accounts of the University, signed by the Treasurer and the University Auditors, shall be submitted to the Government within six months of the closing of the financial year. (4) The accounts of the University shall be audited once a year by an Auditor appointed by the Government for the purpose. (5) The observations of the Government Auditor, together with such annotations as the Treasurer may make, shall be presented to the Syndicate. 1 Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 15. 2 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (I of 1981), s.10. CHAPTER VII GENERAL PROVISONS 33. Opportunity to show cause.-Except as otherwise provided, no officer, Teacher or other employee of the University holding a permanent post shall be reduced in rank, or removed or compulsorily retired from service, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken. 34. Appeal to and review by the Syndicate.- (1) Where an order is passed punishing any officer (other than the Vice-Chancellor), Teacher or other employee of the University or altering or interpreting to his disadvantage the prescribed terms or conditions of his service, he shall, where the order is passed by the Vice-Chancellor or any other officer or teacher of the University, have the right to appeal to the Syndicate against the order, and, where the order is made by the Syndicate, have the right to apply to that Authority for review of that order. (2) The appeal or application for review shall be submitted to the Vice-Chancellor who shall lay it before the Syndicate with his views. 1[(3) No order on an appeal or application for review shall be passed without affording to the appellant or applicant, as the case may be, an opportunity of being heard.] 35. Pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund.-The University shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, Teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, such pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund scheme as it may deem fit. (2) Where any provident fund is constituted under this Act, the provisions of the Provident Fund Act, 1925 (XIX of 1925), shall apply to such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund and the University were the Government. 36. Commencement of term of office of members of Authorities.-When a member of a newly constituted Authoirty is elected, appointed or nominated, his term of office, as fixed under this Act shall commence from such date as may be prescribed. 2[36A. Member of an Authority to cease to be member in certain circumstances.-An elected, appointed or nominated member of any Authority shall cease to be a member if he- (a) absents himself, without the leave of such Authority, from three consecutive meetings thereof; or (b) accepts any assignments which involves his absence from the University for a period of six months or more.] 37. Filling of casual vacancies in Authorities.-Any casual vacancy among the elected, appointed or nominated members of any Authority shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by the person or persons or the body who elected, appointed or nominated the member whose place has become vacant and the person elected, appointed or nominated to the vacancy shall be a member of such Authority for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. 1 Added by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1984 (27 of 1984), s. 2. 2 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (7 of 1981), s. 3. 38. Filling of vacancies in Authorities in certain circumstances.-Where a vacancy in the membership of an Authority cannot be filled because of- (a) the office the holder whereof was to be a member of the Authority ex-officio having ceased to exist; (b) the organization, institution or other body, other than the University, having ceased either to exist or to function; or (c) the occurrence of other circumstances in which it has become impracticable to fill the vacancy, the vacancy shall be filled in such manner as the Chancellor may direct. 39. Disputes about membership of Authorities.-If a question arises whether any person is entitled to be a member of any Authority, the matter shall be referred to a committee consisting of the Vice-Chancellor, the Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan who is a member of the Syndicate and the most senior of the Deans who are members of the Syndicate; and the decision of this committee shall be final and binding. 40. Proceedings of Authorities not invalidated by vacancies.-No act, proceeding, resolution or decision of any Authority shall be invalid by reason only of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, or in the election, appointment or nomination of any member of, the Authority. 41. First Statutes.-Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the Statutes set out in the Schedule shall be deemed to be the Statutes framed under section 27 and shall remain in force until they are amended or replaced by new Statutes framed in accordance with this Act. 42. [Repeal and Savings.] Omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch., II. 43. [Transitional Provisions.] Omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch., II. 1[43A. Tripartite mobility.-(1) Any Officer, teacher or other employee of the University shall, as the Chancellor may direct, serve in a Government department or an educational or research institution in the public interest: Provided that the terms and conditions offered to him shall not be less favourable than those admissible to him in the University and that full benefit of his previous service shall be allowed to him: Provided further that, in the case of a teacher, such direction shall be issued after consulting the Syndicate. (2) The Chancellor may place the services of an employee of the Government or any other University or an educational or research institution at the disposal of the University in the public interest: Provided that the terms and conditions offered to him shall not be less favourable than those enjoyed by him immediately before his services are placed at the disposal of the University and that full benefit of his previous service shall be allowed to him: 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 1981 (7 of 1981), s. 4 for the original section 43A which was added by Ord. 1 of 1981 s. 11. Provided further that, in the case of a teacher, the Chancellor may consult the Selection Board of the University before placing his services at the disposal of the University.] 44. Removal of difficulties.-(1) If any difficulty arises as to the first constitution or reconstitution of any Authority upon the coming into force of this Act or otherwise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Chancellor may, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, give appropriate directions to remove such difficulty. 1[44A. Dissolution of Associations or Unions of the University Employees.-All Associations or Unions of the University employees, by whatever name called, shall stand dissolved: Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may constitute Committees for the welfare and academic advancement of the employees.] 45. [Repeal of Ordinance XXXIX of 1972] Omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch., II. THE SCHEDULE (See section 41) THE FIRST STATUTES 1. The Faculties.-(1) The University shall include the following Faculties and such other faculties as may be prescribed by Statutes, namely:- (i) Faculty of Mathematical Sciences; (ii) Faculty of Physical Sciences; (iii) Faculty of Chemical Sciences; (iv) Faculty of Biological Sciences; (v) Faculty of Earth Sciences; (vi) Faculty of Social Sciences 2[;] 2[(vii) Faculty of Medicines.] (2) There shall be a Board of each Faculty which shall consist of- (i) the Dean of the Faculty to be 3[appointed] in the manner prescribed in paragraph (2) of Statute 2 2[:] 2[Provided that, in the case of subjects in a Faculty which are taught in the affiliated college or colleges only, - 1Added by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 16. 2Subs. and added by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 12. 3Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (7 of 1981), s. 5. (a) if there is only one such college, the principal of that college, or (b) if there are more than one such college, the person elected by the Principals of such colleges from amongst themselves, shall be the Dean of the Faculty.] (ii) the Professors, Associate Professors and Chairman of the Teaching Departments comprised in the Faculty; (iii) two members of each Board of Studies comprised in the Faculty, to be nominated by the Board of Studies concerned ; and (iv) three Teachers to be nominated by the Academic Council by reason of their specialised knowledge of the subjects which, though not assigned to the Faculty, have, in the opinion of the Academic Council, important bearing on the subjects assigned to the Faculty. (3) The members mentioned in clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph 2 shall hold office for three years. (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of a Faculty shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (5) The Board of each Faculty shall, subject to the general control of the Academic Council and the Syndicate, have the power- (a) to co-ordinate the teaching and research work in the subject assigned to the Faculty; (b) to scrutinise the recommendations of the Board of Studies Comprised in the Faculty in regard to the appointment of paper setters and examiners, except for research examiners, and to forward the panels of suitable papers setters and examiners for each examination to the Vice­Chancellor; (c) to consider any other academic matter relating to the Faculty and to report thereon to the Academic Council; and (d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Statutes. 2. Dean.-(1) There shall be a Dean of each Faculty who shall be the Chairman and convener of the Board of the Faculty. 1[(2) The Dean of each Faculty shall be appointed by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Professors in the Faculty,] (3) The Dean shall hold office for 2[five] year. (4) The Dean shall present candidates for admission to degrees (except honorary degrees) in the courses falling within the purview of the Faculty. (5) The Dean shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (7 of 1981), s. 5, which was previously subs. by Ord. 1 of 1981, s. 12. 2Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 17. 3. Teaching Departments and Chairmen.-(1) There shall be a Teaching Department of each subject or group of subjects, as may be prescribed by Regulations, and each Teaching Department shall be headed by a Chairman. 1[(2) The Chairman of a Teaching Department or the Director of an Institute shall be appointed by the Syndicate on the recommendations of the Vice Chancellor from amongst the 2[five] most senior Professors and Associate Professor of the Department for a period of three years : Provided that in Departments in which there is no Professor or Associate Professor, the Department shall be looked after by Dean of the Faculty with the help and assistance of 2[a teacher of the Department nominated by the Vice-Chancellor.]] (3) The Chairman of a Department shall plan, organize and supervise the work of the Department and shall be responsible to the Dean for the work of his Department. 4. Boards of Studies.-(1) There shall be a separate Board of Studies for each subject or group of subjects, as may be prescribed by Regulations. (2) Each Board of Studies shall consist of- (i) the Chairman of the Teaching Department concerned; (ii) all Professors and Associate Professors in the Teaching Department concerned; (iii) two University Teachers, other than Professors or Associate Professors, to be appointed by the Academic Council; (iv) three Teachers, other than University Teachers, to be appointed by the Syndicate; (v) one expert to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor: Provided that, in the case of subjects which are taught in the constituent colleges 3[or affiliated colleges] only, the Board of Studies shall consist of- (a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Syndicate; (b) five teachers of the colleges to be appointed by the Academic Council; and (c) two experts to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor. (3) The term of office of members of the Board of Studies other than ex-officio members shall be three years. (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Studies shall be one-half of the number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (5) The Chairman of the University Teaching Department concerned shall be the Chairman and Convener of the Board of Studies. Where in respect of a subject there is no University Teaching Department, the Chairman of the Board of Studies shall be appointed by the Syndicate. 1 Subs. by Ordinance, 7 of 1981, s. 5 which was earlier amended by Ord. I of 1981. 2 Subs, by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985(31 of 1985), s. 17. 3 Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1978 (26 of 1978), s. 12. (6) The functions of the Board of Studies shall be- (a) to advise the Authorities on all academic matters connected with instruction, research and examination in the subject or subjects concerned; (b) to propose curricula and syllabi for all degree, diploma and certificate courses in the subject or subjects concerned; (c) to suggest a panel of names of paper setters and examiners in the subject or subjects concerned; and (d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Regulations. 5. Advanced Studies and Research Board.-(1) The Advanced Studies and Research Board shall consist of- (i) the Vice­Chancellor, who shall be its Chairman; (ii) the Deans; (iii) three University Professors, other than Deans, to be appointed by the Syndicate; and (iv) three University Teachers having research qualifications and experience, to be appointed by the Academic Council. (2) The term of office of the members of the Advanced Studies and Research Board other than ex-officio members shall be three years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Advanced Studies and Research Board shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (4) The functions of the Advanced Studies and Research Board shall be- (a) to advise the Authorities on all matters connected with the promotion of advanced studies and research in the University; (b) to consider and report to the Authorities on the institution of research degrees in the University; (c) to propose Regulations regarding the award of research degrees; (d) to appoint supervisors for research students and to determine the subjects of their thesis ; (e) to recommend panels of names of paper setters and examiners for research examinations after considering the proposals of the Board of Studies in this behalf; and (f) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Statutes. 6. Selection Board.-1[(1) The Selection Board shall consist of- (1) the Vice­Chancellor who shall be its Chairman; 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 17. (2) Chairman, University Grants Commission, Islamabad. (3) Secretary, Ministry of Education, Islamabad. (4) The Chairman, of the Federal Public Service Commission or a member nominated by him; (5) The Chief Justice of Pakistan or a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan nominated by him; (6) One member of the Syndicate and two other men of eminence, to be nominated by the Chancellor, provided that none of the three is an employee of the University; (7) The Dean of the Faculty concerned; (8) The Chairman of the teaching Department concerned: Provided that when the Board meets for selection of officers other than teachers, the Dean of the Faculty and the Chairman of the Teaching Department shall not take part in the proceedings of the Board]. (2) The members mentioned in clause (v) of paragraph (1) shall hold office for two years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Selection Board shall be three. (4) No member who is a candidate for the post to which appointment is to be made shall take part in the proceedings of the Board. (5) In selecting candidates for the posts of Professors and Associate Professors, the Selection Board shall co-opt or consult three experts in the subject concerned and, in selecting candidates for the other teaching posts, two experts in the subject concerned, to be nominated by the Vice- Chancellor from a standing list of experts for each subject approved by the Syndicate on the recommendation of the Selection Board and revised from time to time. 7. Functions of Selection Board.-(1) The Selection Board for Teaching and other posts shall consider the applications received in response to an advertisement and recommend to the Syndicate the names of suitable candidates for appointment to such posts. (2) The Selection Board may recommend to the Syndicate the grant of a higher initial pay in a suitable case for reasons to be recorded. (3) The Selection Board may recommend to the Syndicate the appointment of an eminently qualified person to a Professorship in the University on terms and conditions which differ in any particular from those prescribed. (4) In the event of an unresolved difference of opinion between the Selection Board and the Syndicate, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final. 1[7A. Affiliation Committee.-(1) The Affiliation Committee shall consist of- (i) a Chairman to be nominated by the Syndicate; (ii) two Professors to be nominated by the Syndicate; (iii) one representative of the University Grants Commission to be nominated by that Commission; (iv) one representative of the Ministry of Education to be nominated by that Ministry; and (v) an officer of the University to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, who shall also act as Secretary to the Committee. (2) The term of office of the members of the Affiliation Committee, other than ex-officio members, shall be two years. (3) The Affiliation Committee may co-opt such experts, not exceeding two, as it may deem necessary. (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Affiliation Committee shall be three. (5) The functions of the Affiliation Committee shall be- (a) to make inspection of an educational institution seeking affiliation to, or admission to the privileges of the University and make a report to the Syndicate; (b) to enquire into complaints of breach of any of the conditions of affiliation by the affiliated college and make a report to the Syndicate; and (c) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Regulations]. 8. Finance and Planning Committee.-(1) The Finance and Planning Committee shall consist of- (i) the Vice­Chancellor, who shall be its Chairman; 2* * * * * * * (ii) one member of the Senate, to be appointed by the Senate; (iii) one member of the Syndicate, to be appointed by the Syndicate; (iv) two members of the Academic Council, to be appointed by the Academic Council; (v) one member to be nominated by the Chancellor; and (vi) the Treasurer. (2) The term of office of the members other than the Vice-Chancellor and the Treasurer shall be three years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Finance and Planning Committee shall be three. 1Ins. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance. 1978 (26 of 1978). s. 12. 2New clause (ia) ins. by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (60 of 1976), s. 12 has been omitted by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance. 1981 (1 of 1981), s.12. 9. Functions of the Finance and Planning Committee. The functions of the Finance and Planning Committee shall be- (a) to consider the annual statement of accounts, the annual revised budget estimates and advise the syndicate thereon; (b) to review periodically the financial position of the University; (c) to advise the Syndicate on all matters relating to planning, development, finance, investments and accounts of the University; and (d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Statutes. 10. Discipline Committee.-(1) The Discipline Committee shall consist of- (i) a Chairman, to be nominated by the Vice­Chancellor; (ii) 1[one] Professors, to be nominated by the Academic Council; (iii) one member, to be nominated by the Syndicate; (iv) the Officer Incharge of Students Affairs who shall also be its secretary; and 2[(v) one Professor or Associate Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor. (2) The term of office of the members of the Committee, other than ex-officio members, shall be two years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Discipline Committee shall be four. (4) The functions of the Discipline Committee shall be- (a) to propose Regulations to the Academic Council for the conduct of University students, maintenance of discipline and for dealing with cases of indiscipline; and (b) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Regulations. 1Subs. by the Quaid-e-Azam University (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1985 (31 of 1985), s. 17, for “two”. 2Clause (v) which was previously amended by the University of Islamabad (Amdt.) Act. 1976 (60 of 1976), s. 12, have been subs. ibid..