THE PAKISTAN NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE ARTS ACT, 1973. CONTENTS 1. Short title, extent and commencement 2. Definitions 3. Establishment of the Council 4. Board of Governors 5. Director General 6. Headquarters 7. Functions 8. Funds 9. Audit of accounts 10 Power to make rules 11 Power to make regulations THE PAKISTAN NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE ARTS ACT, 1973. 1ACT NO LIX OF 1973 [11th August, 1973] An Act to provide for the establishment of the Pakistan National Council of the Arts. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the establishment of a Pakistan National Council of the Arts for the patronage, promotion and development of the Arts, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; It is hereby enacted as follows:- 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Pakistan National Council of the Arts Act, 1973. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once 2. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) “artistic activity” means any activity so declared by the Federal Government by notification in the official Gazette; (b) “Board” means the Board of Governors of the Council constituted under section 4; (c) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Council; (d) “Council” means the Pakistan National Council of the Arts established under section 3; and (e) “Director-General” means the Director-General of the Council. 3. Establishment of the Council.-(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, establish a Council to be called the Pakistan National Council of the Arts. (2) The Council shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable, and immovable, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 1 For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Gaz. of P., 1973, Ext., Pt. III, p. 1205. 1[4. Board of Governors.- (1) The management, overall control and supervision of the affairs of the council shall vest in a Board of Governor consisting of the following members, namely:- (a) the Federal Minister-in-Charge of Culture who shall also be the Chairman; (b) the Minister of State for Culture, who shall also be the Vice-Chairman: Provided that, if there is no such Minister of State; the Federal Government may nominate any member of the Board to be the Vice-Chairman; (c) the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan in the Division dealing with Culture; (d) a representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; (e) the Financial Adviser of the Division dealing with Culture; (f) the Joint Secretary to the Government of Pakistan in the Division dealing with Culture; (g) the Director-General; (h) the Director of Archaeology; (i) the Managing Director, Pakistan Television Corporation; (j) the Director-General, Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation; (k) twenty persons, including five women, eminent in the fields or art and culture, to be nominated by the Chairman; and (l) a member-secretary to be appointed by the Chairman.]. (2) The Board of Governors shall have power to co-opt. members from amongst persons who are specialists in their respective field, for advice on particular projects and matters under consideration. (3) The members of the Board, excepting the ex-officio members, shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination, as the case may be. (4) A member of the Board, other than an ex-officio member, may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman, resign his office. (5) Any casual vacancy in the office of a member other than an ex-officio member shall be filled by a person nominated by the Federal Government and the person so nominated shall hold office for the unexpired period of the term of his predecessor. 1 Subs. by the Pakistan National Council of the Arts (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1979 (61 of 1979), s. 2, for sub-section (1). 5. Director-General.-(1) The Director-General shall be appointed by the Chairman on such remuneration and other terms and conditions as the Chairman may determine. (2) The Director-General shall be the chief executive of the Council and shall be responsible to the Board for carrying out the objectives of the Council. (3) The Director-General may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman, resign his office. 6. Headquarters. The headquarters of the Council shall be at Islamabad. 7. Functions.-(1) The Council shall- (a) advise the Federal Government on matters of policy on artistic activity and their implementation; (b) improve knowledge, understanding and practice of the arts and advise the Federal Government in order to increase regional activity through systematic planning and coordination at all levels; (c) coordinate, evaluate and supervise activities of cultural organizations and individuals engaged in cultural activities; (d) advise and assist the Provincial Governments in the setting up of Provincial Art Councils to serve as liaison between the local cultural bodies and the Council with regard to their activities and financial assistance; (e) plan, establish and run art academies, folk museums, exhibition halls, auditoria, art galleries and similar other institutions; (f) organize exhibitions of arts and crafts within Pakistan and in other countries; (g) organize national and regional ensembles for performance within the country and in other countries; (h) organize and promote cultural fairs and festivals; (i) help, establish and organize national unions of artists on the basis of their chosen field of activity; (j) help in the implementation of cultural pacts and programmes on directions of the Federal Government; (k) have contacts with similar organizations in other countries, through the Federal Government; (l) set up penals of experts in specific fields of the arts where necessary; and (m) perform any other function in the field of arts which the Federal Government may direct or which the council may consider necessary or desirable. (2) Where it appears to the Council that an organization engaged in artistic activity which is in receipt of any grant from the Federal Government or the council, is conducting its activities in a manner contrary to the policy laid down by the Council or is in any other way mismanaging its affairs, the Council may, and where the Federal Government so directs shall, hold an enquiry into the affairs of such organization and submit a report to the Federal Government alongwith its recommendations. 8. Funds. The funds of the Council shall be derived from the following sources, namely:- (i) grants of the Federal Government and the Provincial Governments; and (ii) contributions and donations from individuals, local bodies, corporations, institutions, organizations and agencies. 9. Audit of accounts. The accounts of the Council shall be audited by an auditor who is a Chartered Accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961.), appointed by the Federal Government, in consultation with the Auditor-General of Pakistan, on such remuneration, to be paid by the Council, as the Federal Government may fix. 10. Power to make rules. The Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 11. Power to make regulations. The Council may make such regulations as it may consider necessary for carrying the provisions of this Act into effect.