THE PAKISTAN MEDICAL AND DENTAL COUNCIL ORDINANCE, 1962 Last Amended on 2012­08­13 CONTENTS SECTIONS: 1.
Short title, extent and commencement. 2.
Definitions. 3.
Constitution and composition of the Council. 4.
Mode of election. 5.
Restrictions on nominations and elections. 6.
Incorporation of the Council. 7.
Terms of office. 8.
Meeting of the Council. 9.
Officers, Committees and servants of the Council. 10.
Executive Committee. 11.
Recognition of medical institutions and qualifications. 11A.
Recognition of hospitals or institutions for house job or internship or foundation
year training. 12.
Non­Pakistan qualifications in Schedule to be recognised. 13.
Arrangements for schemes with foreign countries. 14.
Recognition of medical qualification granted by a medical Institution outside
Pakistan. 15.
Power of the Council to certify certain persons to be possessed of sufficient
medical qualifications. 16.
Additional medical or dental qualifications. 16A.
Recognition of foreign additional medical or dental qualifications. 16B.
Recognition of continuous professional development opportunity providers. 16C.
Role of specialists' boards. 17.
Omitted. 18.
Recognition of dental institutions and qualifications. 19.
Power of the Council to certify certain persons to be possessed of sufficient
dental qualifications. 20.
Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations. 21.
Inspection. 22.
Withdrawal of recognition. 22 A.
Establishment and running of medical and dental institutions without recognition. 22 B.
Penalty. 23.
Maintenance of Register of medical practitioners. 24.
Omitted. 25.
Omitted. 26.
Maintenance of Register of dental practitioners. 27.
Registers to be public documents. 28.
Penalty for fraudulent representation or registration. 28 A.
Penalty of practicing without registration. 28 B.
Cognizance of offences. 29.
Privileges of registered medical or dental practitioners. 30.
Responsibilities of registered medical or dental practitioner. 31.
Removal of names from the Register. 32.
Omitted. 33.
Power to make Regulations. 34.
Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof. 35.
Commission of inquiry. 36.
Repeals, etc. 36A.
Over­ridding provision. 36B.
Transitory provision. THE FIRST SCHEDULE
RECOGNISED MEDICAL QUALIFICATION GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN PAKISTAN THE SECOND SCHEDULE Omitted. THE THIRD SCHEDULE
RECOGNISED ADDITIONALMEDICAL QUALIFICATION PART 'A'
GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTION IN PAKISTAN PART 'B'
GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTION OUTSIDE PAKISTAN THE FOURTH SCHEDULE Omitted. THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
RECOGNISED DENTAL QUALIFICATIONS THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
APPROVED HOSPITALS OR INSTITUTIONS THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
CONTINUOUS PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY PROVIDERS IN PAKISTAN THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE SPECIALIST BOARDS THE 1[PAKISTAN] MEDICAL AND DENTAL COUNCIL ORDINANCE 1962. ORDINANCE NO. XXXII OF 1962 [5th June, 1962] An Ordinance to reconstitute the 2[Medical and Dental Council] in Pakistan WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate the law relating to the registration of medical
practitioners and dentists and reconstitute the 2[Medical and Dental Council] in Pakistan in order to
establish a uniform minimum standard of basic and higher qualifications in medicine and dentistry ; NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the seventh day of October, 1958, and
in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President is pleased to make and promulgate
the following Ordinance :­ 1. Short title, extent and commencement.­ 3[(1) This Ordinance may be called the 4[Pakistan]
Medical and Dental Council Ordinance, 1962.]. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 4["2. Definitions.-In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,- (a) "approved hospital or institution" means a hospital or an institution included in the Sixth Schedule; (b) "Council" means the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council constituted under this Ordinance; (c) "continuous professional development" means skill enhancement and improvement in personal and professional competence which may- (i) comprise lectures, seminars, courses, individual study or other activities undertaken by a registered medical or dental practitioner; (ii) reasonably be expected to advance a registered medical or dental practitioner's development in his related profession; and (iii) is relevant to the practice of registered medical or dental practitioner; (d) "committee" means any committee constituted under this Ordinance and includes Executive Committee constituted under Section 10; 1Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s. 2. 2Subs. by the Federal LAws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and Sch, II, for "Medical Council". 3Subs. by the Medical Council (Amdt.) Act, 1973 (10 of 1973), s. 2, for sub­section (1). 4Ins. and Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss. 2 and 3. (e) "continuous professional development opportunity provider" means an organization providing continuous professional development opportunities and included in the Seventh
Schedule; (f) "dental institution" means any institution, recognized under this Ordinance, within or outside Pakistan, which trains for, or grants, or both trains for and grants, degrees or
diplomas in dentistry; (g) "house job or foundation year or internship" means hands on training in clinical subjects on a rotational basis in an approved hospital or institution after provisional registration as
a prerequisite for full registration under Section 23; (h) "medical institution" means any institution recognized under this Ordinance, within or outside Pakistan, which trains for, or grants, or both trains for and grants, degrees or
diplomas in medicine; (i) "medicine" means modern scientific medicine and includes surgery and other disciplines, but does not includes veterinary medicine and surgery; (j) "Pakistan university" means any university established under a Pakistan law and having a constituent medical or dental college or both; (k) "President" means President of the Council; (l) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations; (m) "recognized medical qualification" means any basic medical qualification included in the First Schedule; (n) "recognized dental qualification" means any basic dental qualification included in the Fifth Schedule; (o) "recognized additional medical or dental qualification" means any additional medical or dental qualification included in the Third Schedule; (p) "Register" means the Register of medical practitioners maintained under Section 23 or the Register of dental practitioners maintained under Section 26; (q) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner whose name is included in the Register maintained under Section 23; (r) "registered dental practitioner" means a dental practitioner whose name is included in the Register maintained under Section 26; (s) "regulations" mean regulations made under Section 33; (t) "registerable qualifications" mean medical or dental qualifications recognized under Sections 11,15, 16, 18 and 19; and (u) "specialists boards" mean recognized specialist boards included in the Eighth Schedule.".] 1[3. Constitution and composition of the Council.-(1) The Federal Government shall, by
notification in the official Gazette, cause to be constituted a Council consisting of the following
members, namely: (a) one member each from the Senate and the National Assembly to be nominated by the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker from amongst the members of the
respective House; (b) Secretary, Health Department of each Province; (c) one member each to be elected by the members of the Syndicate of each public sector Pakistan university from amongst the members of its medical faculty and denial faculty of
all its constituent as well as affiliated colleges from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan,
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and Islamabad Capital Territory; (d) one member each to be elected by the members of the Syndicate of each private sector Pakistan university from amongst the members of its medical faculty and the dental
faculty of all its constituent as well as affiliated colleges from each Province, Gilgit­
Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital Territory; (e) one member from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital Territory to be elected amongst themselves by the registered medical practitioners; (f) four members to be nominated by the Federal Government of whom one shall be Surgeon General of the Armed Forces Medical Services; (g) one member to be elected from amongst themselves by the registered dentists from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital Territory; (h) one member to be elected from amongst the Professors of the teaching staff of the public sector medical colleges from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital
Territory; (i) one member to be elected from amongst the Professors of the teaching staff of private sector Medical Colleges from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad
Capital Territory; (j) one member to be elected from amongst the Professors of the teaching staff of public sector dental colleges from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital
Territory; (k) one member to be elected from amongst the Professors of the teaching staff of private sector dental colleges from each Province, Gilgit­Baltistan, FATA and Islamabad Capital
Territory; (l) one member to be elected by the Council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons; (m) one member, belonging to the legal profession, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan; 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.4. (n) senior most officer looking after health matters at the Federal level or an authority looking after the affairs of Council at Federal level designated or notified by the Federal
Government, as the case may be; and (o) immediate ex­President of the Council who shall be a member of the Council for one non­ renewable term of three years provided that he or she will not hold office. (2) The President of the Council shall be elected by the members of the Council from amongst
themselves. (3) No act done by the Council shall be invalid on the ground merely of existence of any vacancy
in or any defect in the constitution of the Council. (4) The President shall be the head of the office of the Council and shall be the competent
authority for all employees of the Council.]. 1[4. Mode of election.-(1) An election under clauses (c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) of sub­
section (1) of Section 3 shall be conducted by the Council as may be prescribed. (2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Council it shall be referred to the Federal
Government whose decision thereon shall be final. ]. 1[5. Restrictions on nominations and elections.-(1) No person shall be eligible for nomination
or election, except under clauses (b) and (m) of sub­section (1) of Section 3, unless he is a registered
medical practitioner or a registered dentist, as the case may be. (2) No person shall be eligible for nomination or election under clauses (e) and (g) of sub­section
(l) of Section 3 unless he resides in the Province concerned. (3) No person shall be eligible for election under clauses (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) of sub­section (1)
of Section 3 unless he has had at least four years teaching experience, certified by the Council, as a
Professor in the faculty of a medical or dental college, as the case may be. (4) No person shall be eligible for election under clauses (c) and (d) of sub­section (1) of Section
3 unless he has had at least four years teaching experience, certified by the Council, as a Professor,
Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Lecturer etc., in the faculty of a medical or dental college,
as the case may be. (5) No person shall at one and the same time serve as a member under more than one clauses of
sub­section (1) of Section 3.] 6. Incorporation of the Council. The Council constituted under section 3 shall be a body
corporate by the name of the 2[Medical and Dental Council], having perpetual succession and a
common seal, with power to acquire and hold property both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.5 and 6. 2Subs. by Medical Concil (Amdt.) Act, 1973 (10 of 1973), s.5, for "Medical Council". 1[The Council shall be a regulatory body for regulating medical and dental profession, medical
and dental education and institutions,]. 1[7. Terms of office.-(1) The President of the Council shall hold office for a term not exceeding
four years and not extending beyond the expiry of his term as member of the Council. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub­Sections (4) and (6), a member shall hold office for a term of
four years from the date of his nomination or election or until his successor has been duly nominated
or elected, whichever is earlier. (3) If a member fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Council or remains out of
Pakistan for a continuous period exceeding one year or, in the case of an elected member, ceases to
represent his electoral college, he shall cease to be the member of the Council. A person shall
thereupon be nominated or, as the case may be, elected to fill the vacancy: Provided that a member nominated by the Federal Government shall hold office only during
pleasure of the Federal Government. If a nominated member is being considered for cancellation of
membership while his term remains, he shall be given a notice to show­cause and an opportunity of
personal hearing by the Federal Government before a final order is passed. The Federal Government's
nominees shall not be eligible for the post of President. (4) The case of a member of the Council, other than the member nominated under clauses (a), (b)
and (o) of sub­section (1) of Section 3, shall be forwarded to the Federal Government for decision of
maintaining his membership or otherwise in the following circumstances, namely:­ (a) if the Council decides by a majority that his membership is not in the interest of the Council; or (b) his name has been removed from the Register of practitioners as a result of inquiry under Section 31; or (c) he becomes insane or is declared an insolvent by a competent Court; of (d) he is convicted for a criminal offense which implies moral turpitude, including unprofessional and infamous conduct as provided under Section 31. (5) Other than the member nominated under clauses (a), (b), (m) and (o) of sub­section (1) of
Section 3, the Council may, only by a majority decision, suspend the membership of a member if he
falls under sub section (4) till a decision by the Federal Government about maintenance of his
membership or otherwise. (6) Where the said term of four years is about to expire in respect of any member, his successor
may be nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires, but shall
not assume office until the expiry of the said term. (7) An elected or nominated member may, at any time, resign his membership by writing under
his hand addressed to the President and the seat of such member shall be deemed to have fallen
vacant from the date of acceptance of his resignation by the President. 1Added and subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.7 and 8. (8) A vacancy in the Council shall be filled through election or nomination, as the case may be,
and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office for the full term of four
years.]. 8. Meeting of the Council. (1) The Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time
and place as may be 1[decided by the President]. (2) Until otherwise provided by Regulation, 1[one­third] members of the Council shall form a
quorum, and all of the acts of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and
voting. 9. Officers, Committees and servants of the Council.­(1) The Council shall­ (a) elect from amongst its members a Vice­President ; (b) constitute from amongst its members an Executive Committee, and such other Committees for general or special purposes as the Council deems necessary to carry out
the purposes of this Ordinance ; 1[(c) appoint a Registrar, a Secretary and a Treasurer to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance; (d) appoint, employ or nominate such other advisers to the President, officers, officials and servants on regular basis or contract as the Council deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Ordinance; (e) require the Treasurer to take from the Registrar, Secretary, advisers to the President, officers, officials and servants, such security for the due performance of their duties as
the Council deems necessary; and (f) fix the remuneration and allowances to be paid to the President, Vice­President, members, officers and servants of the Council employed under this section.]. (2) All persons appointed or employed under this section shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 1[10. Executive Committee.-(1) The Executive Committee shall consist of nine members, of
whom seven shall be elected by the Council from amongst its members and of which at least one shall
be a dental practitioner and one from the post graduate institutions. The President shall have the
power to co­opt a maximum of two additional members to the Committee. (2) The President: Vice­president of the Council shall be ex­officio members of the Executive
Committee and shall be its President and Vice­president respectively. (3) In addition to the power and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Ordinance, the
Executive Committee shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Council may confer
upon it by regulations and shall have the power and responsibility to take decisions of administrative
and financial nature for the smooth functioning and working of the Council.]. 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss. 9, 10 and 11. 1[11. Recognition of medical institutions and qualifications.-(1) The Federal Government may grant
recognition to any medical institution in Pakistan which trains or grants or both trains and grants medical
qualifications and the qualifications granted by them. All such recognized medical institutions or qualifications
shall be included in the First Schedule by the Federal Government by notification in the official Gazette. (2) if any medical institution in Pakistan intends to get recognition of the institution which trains or grants
or both trains and grants medical qualifications or qualification granted by it in pursuance of sub­section (1) it
shall apply to the Federal Government for the same. (3) The Federal Government shall transmit the application to the Council after being satisfied that
application is complete and is in accordance with the prescribed procedure. The Council shall form
recommendations for the Federal Government after assessing the institution and the qualification as per
prescribed procedure. Upon receiving recommendations from the Council, the Federal Government shall grant
recognition as provided under sub­section (1). (4) The notification for the grant of recognition may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last
column of the First Schedule against such institution and medical qualification granted by it, declaring that it
shall be a recognized medical institution or qualification only when granted after the date of notification.]. 1[11A. Recognition of hospitals or institutions for house job or internship or foundation year
training.-(1) The Federal Government may grant recognition to any hospitals or institutions in Pakistan which
train for house job or internship or foundation year. All such recognized hospitals or institutions shall be
included in the Sixth Schedule by the Federal Government by notification in the official Gazette. (2) If any hospital and institution in Pakistan intends to get recognition of the institution which trains for
house job, internship or foundation year in pursuance of sub­section (1), it shall apply to the Federal
Government for the same. (3) The Federal Government shall transmit the application to the Council after being satisfied that
application is complete and is in accordance with the prescribed procedure. The Council shall form
recommendations for the Federal Government after assessing the institution as per prescribed procedure. Upon
receiving recommendations from the Council, the Federal Government shall grant recognition as provided under
sub­section (1). (4) The notification for the grant of recognition may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last
column of the Sixth Schedule against such hospital or institution, declaring that it shall be a recognized hospital
or institution only when granted after the date of notification.]. 2* * * * * * * 2[13. Arrangements for schemes with foreign countries. At any time, the Council may enter into
negotiations with the appropriate authority in any foreign country or organization, for the settling of a scheme
for improvement of medical education in Pakistan or postgraduate degrees or any matter or prospect related to
the medical or dental profession.]. 3* * * * * * * 1Subs. and Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.12 and 13. 2Omitted and subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.14 and 15. 3Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.16. 1[15. Power of the Council to certify certain persons to be possessed of sufficient medical
qualifications.-(1) If, after an examination by a board constituted by the Council, the Council is
satisfied that a person holding a qualification granted by a medical institution outside Pakistan, is
possessed of sufficient knowledge and skill to be registered as a practitioner for the purpose of this
Ordinance, it may recommend to the Federal Government to issue a notification in favour of such
person to register him and his qualification. Upon such notification, the Council shall register the
qualification possessed by the person without it being entered in any of the Schedules of this
Ordinance. (2) The Council shall register the qualification granted by a medical institution outside Pakistan,
possessed by the person by maintaining a separate list in the Register.]. 1[16. Additional medical or dental qualifications.-(1) The Federal Government may grant
recognition to any post­graduate medical or dental institutions in or outside Pakistan which train or
grant or both train and grant additional medical or dental qualifications and the qualifications granted
by them. All such recognized additional medical or dental institutions or qualifications shall be
included in the Third Schedule by the Federal Government by notification in the official Gazette. (2) If any post­graduate medical and dental institution in or outside Pakistan intends to get
recognition of the institution which trains or grants or both trains and grants additional medical and
dental qualifications or qualification granted by it in pursuance of sub­section (1) it shall apply to the
Federal Government for the same. If an institution wishes to only train for a recognized postgraduate
qualifications in any specialty, it shall apply to the qualification awarding body and after consultation
and approval of the Council, the institution shall be added in the Third Schedule. (3) The Federal Government shall transmit the application to the Council after being satisfied that
application is complete and is in accordance with the prescribed procedure. The Council in
consultation with the examining body shall form recommendations for the Federal Government after
assessing the institution and the qualification as per prescribed procedure. Upon receiving
recommendations from the Council, the Federal Government shall grant recognition as provided
under sub­section (1). (4) The notification for the grant of recognition may also direct that an entry shall be made in the
last column of the Third Schedule against such institution and additional medical and dental
qualification granted by it, declaring that it shall be a recognized post­graduate medical and dental
institution and additional medical and dental qualification only when granted after the date of
notification.]. 2[16­A. Recognition of foreign additional medical or dental qualifications.-The Council shall
evaluate any additional medical or dental qualifications granted by any foreign institution and may- 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss. 17 and 18. 2Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.19. (a) recommend to the Federal Government that such institution or qualification be- (i) recognized and included in the Third Schedule as specified in Section 16; or (ii) notified only and shall not be included in the Third Schedule, however, a separate list thereof shall be maintained; or (b) proceed as per Section 15 or 19, as the case may be. 16­B. Recognition of continuous professional development opportunity providers.-(1) The
Federal Government may grant recognition to any organization in Pakistan, which provides
opportunities of continuous professional development to the registered medical and dental
practitioners. All such recognized organizations shall be included in the Seventh Schedule by the
Federal Government by notification in the official Gazette. (2) If any organization in Pakistan, which provides opportunities of continuous professional
development to the registered medical and dental practitioners, intends to get recognition of the
organization in pursuance of sub­section (1) it shall apply to the Federal Government for the same. (3) The Federal Government shall transmit the application to the Council after being satisfied that
application is complete and is in accordance with the prescribed procedure. The Council shall form
recommendations for the Federal, Government after assessing the institution and the qualification as
per prescribed procedure. Upon receiving recommendations from the Council, the Federal
Government shall grant recognition as provided under sub­section (1), declaring that it shall be a
recognized organization in Pakistan, which provides opportunities of continuous professional
development to the registered medical and dental practitioners only when granted after the date of
notification. (4) A separate list of international continuous professional development opportunities providing
organization or institutes shall be maintained by the Council. 16­C. Role of specialists' boards.-(1) The Federal Government may grant recognition to
specialists boards which shall help the Council in maintenance of such minimum standards of
proficiency in that particular specialty as may be prescribed by the Council. All recognized specialists
boards shall be included in the Eighth Schedule by the Federal Government by notification in the
official Gazette. (2) The Council shall authorize a specialist board constituted as per prescribed procedures and
shall form recommendations for the Federal Government. Upon receiving recommendations from the
Council, the Federal Government shall grant recognition as provided under sub­section (1), declaring
that it shall be a recognized specialists board only when granted after the date of notification.]. 1* * * * * * * 2[18. Recognition of dental institutions and qualifications.-(1) The Federal Government may
grant recognition to any dental institutions in Pakistan which train or grant or both train and grant
dental qualifications and the qualifications granted by them. All such recognized dental institutions or
qualifications shall be included in the Fifth Schedule by the Federal Government by notification in the
official Gazette. (2) If any dental institution in Pakistan intends to get recognition of the institution which trains or
grants or both trains and grants dental qualifications or qualification granted by it in pursuance of sub­
section (1) it shall apply to the Federal Government for the same. (3) The Federal Government shall transmit the application to the Council after being satisfied that
application is complete and is in accordance with the prescribed procedure. The Council shall form
recommendations for the Federal Government after assessing the institution and the qualification as
per prescribed procedure. Upon receiving recommendations from the Council, the Federal
Government shall grant recognition as provided under sub­section (1). (4) The notification for the grant of recognition may also direct that an entry shall be made in the
last column of the Fifth Schedule against such institution and dental qualification granted by it,
declaring that it shall be a recognized dental institution and dental qualification only when granted
after the date of notification.]. 2[19. Power of the Council to certify certain persons to be possessed of sufficient dental
qualifications.-(1) If after an examination by a board constituted by the Council, the Council is
satisfied that a person holding a qualification granted by a dental institution outside Pakistan, is
possessed of sufficient knowledge and skill to be registered as a practitioner for the purpose of this
Ordinance, it may recommend to the Federal Government to issue a notification in favour of such
person to register him and his qualification. Upon such notification, the Council shall register the
qualification possessed by the person without it being entered in any Schedule of this Ordinance. (2) The Council shall register the qualification granted by a dental institution outside Pakistan,
possessed by the person by maintaining a separate list in the register.]. 2[20. Power to acquire information as to courses of study and examination. Every medical or
dental institution or hospital or organization in Pakistan recognized under this Ordinance, which trains
for or grants or both trains for and grants a medical or a dental qualification, additional medical or
dental qualification, trains for house job or internship or foundation year or is a continuous
professional development opportunity provider shall furnish such information as the Council may,
from time to time, require about the facilities and faculty available in the institution, courses of study
and processes of admission of the institution concerned, examinations required to be undergone prior
to such qualifications being conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtaining such
qualifications.]. 1Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.20. 2Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss. 21, 22 and 23. 1[21. Inspection.-(1) The Executive Committee shall approve a list of inspectors in the country and the
President shall commission such number of medical or dental inspectors from the approved list, as it may deem
appropriate, to inspect the facilities for training available at the medical or dental institutions and attend at any
or all of the examinations held by medical or dental institutions in Pakistan recognized under this Ordinance for
the purpose of granting recognized medical or dental or additional medical or denial qualifications. (2) Inspectors appointed under this section shall form a comprehensive report about the facilities for
training in the institution and shall not interfere with conduct of any examination and shall report to the
Executive Committee on the standard of the inspected examination which they attend and on the courses of
study and facilities for teaching provided by the medical or dental institution inspected for different stages
leading up to examinations and on any other matters in regard to which the President or Executive Committee
may require them to report. (3) The Executive Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the medical or dental institution
concerned and shall also forward a copy, with the remarks of such medical or dental institution thereon, to the
Council.]. 1[22. Withdrawal of recognition.-(1) If a recognized institution is violating provisions of this Ordinance
and regulations made thereunder or the facilities for training for the courses of study or standard of examination
in the institution to obtain a recognized medical or dental qualification, additional medical or dental
qualification, training for house job or internship or foundation year or in a continuous professional
development opportunity providing organization has deteriorated to an extent that the standard of proficiency
required from candidates at any examination held for the purpose of granting such qualification is not such as
to secure to persons holding such qualification the knowledge and skill requisite for the efficient practice of
medicine or dentistry, the Council may stop further intake of students in the institution and forward a summary
of its findings and its intent to the medical or dental institution with an intimation of the period within which the
medical or dental institution may submit its explanation to the Council and may request for a hearing before the
Council if it so desires. (2) If the Council is not satisfied with the explanation then it shall make a recommendation to the Federal
Government for closure of the institution to which shall include a scheme for adjustment of students in other
recognized institutions of the corresponding public or private sector, as the ease may be. (3) On recommendations of the Council, the Federal Government may, by notification in the official
Gazelle, direct that an entry shall be made in the First, Third, Fifths Sixth or Seventh Schedule, as the case may
be, against the said medical or dental or a postgraduate institution and qualification granted by it, hospital or
continuous professional development opportunity provider declaring that, it shall be a recognized medical,
dental or additional medical or dental qualification, institution, hospital and continuous professional
development opportunity provider only before the date of notification.]. 2[22­A. Establishment and running of medical and dental institutions without recognition.-No
person shall run nor establish any institution for training or grant or both training or grant of medical or dental
qualifications, additional medical or denial education, training for house job, internship or foundation year or an
organization for continuous professional development opportunity providing neither shall any university grant
affiliation to any such an institution nor any such institution shall award any degree unless recognition has been
granted to such college or institution under this Ordinance. 1Subs.by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss. 24 and 25. 2Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s. 26. 22­B. Penalty. (1) Whoever runs or establishes or endorses any institution or advertises
admissions in an institution for imparting education in medicine or dentistry, which is not recognized
under Sections 11, 11­A, 16, 16­A or 18 or in respect of which recognition has been withdrawn under
Section 22, shall be guilty of an offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years but shall not be less than a year or with fine which may extend to ten million
rupees but shall not be less than five million rupees or with both and shall also be liable to closure of
such institution. (2) Where any contravention of this Ordinance has been committed by a body corporate or
institution and it appears from the relevant documents that such offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of or is attributed to any negligence on the part of any director, partner,
manager, secretary or other officer of the body corporate or institution such director, partner,
manager, secretary or other officer of the body corporate or institution, shall be deemed guilty of such
contravention along with the body corporate or institution and shall be punished accordingly: Provided that in the case of a company as defined under the Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII
of 1984), only its Chief Executive shall be liable under this section. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "body corporate or institution" includes a firm,
association of persons and a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (XXI of
1860) or under the Co­operative Societies Act, 1925 (VII of 1925). (3) Where any contravention of this Ordinance has been committed by any Government agency,
local authority or local council and it appears from the relevant documents that such contravention
has been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any negligence on the part
of the head or any other officer of the Government agency, local authority or local council, such head
or other officer shall also be deemed guilty of such contravention alongwith the Government agency,
local authority or local council and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.]. 1[23. Maintenance of Register of medical practitioners.-(1) The Council shall maintain a
Register of medical practitioners possessing qualifications which are recognized medical or additional
medical qualifications for the purposes of this Ordinance and may prescribe the necessary particulars
to be entered in the Register. Holders of a recognized basic degree shall be registered on provisional
basis for internship or foundation or house job of a minimum of one year duly assessed, hands on
clinical rotation in an approved hospital or institution included in the Sixth Schedule which shall be
mandatory for conversion of provisional registration into full registration. (2) The practitioner shall be deemed to hold a valid registration and entitled to be known and
eligible for privileges of a registered medical practitioner if his name is retained on the Register after
fulfillment of requirements of continuation of registration as laid down by the Council from time to
time and provided he had paid the dues of the Council. The valid registration certificate shall be the
licence to practice medicine in Pakistan.]. 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.27. 1* * * * * * * 1* * * * * * * 2[26. Maintenance of Register of dental practitioners.-(1) The Council shall maintain a Register
of dental practitioners possessing qualifications which are recognized dental or additional dental
qualifications for the purposes of this Ordinance and may prescribe the necessary particulars to be
entered in the Register. Holders of a recognized basic degree shall be registered on provisional basis
for internship or foundation or house job of a minimum of one year duly assessed, hands on clinical
rotation in an approved hospital or institution included in the Sixth Schedule which shall be
mandatory for conversion of provisional registration into full registration. (2) The practitioner shall be deemed to hold valid registration and entitled to be known and eligible
for privileges of a registered dental practitioner if his name is retained on the Register after fulfillment
of requirements of continuation of registration as laid down by the Council from time to time and
provided he had paid the dues of the Council. The valid registration certificate shall be the licence to
practice dentistry in Pakistan.]. 27. Registers to be public documents. The Register maintained under section 23 or section 26
shall be deemed to be public document within the meaning of the 2[Qanun­e­Shahadat, 1984 (P.O.
No. 10 of 1984).] 3[28. Penalty for fraudulent representation or registration. Whoever falsely pretends to be
registered under this Ordinance as a medical practitioner or dentist and uses with his name or title any
words or letters representing that he is so registered with the Council or uses the word "doctor"
without legal basis, irrespective of whether any person is actually deceived by such pretence or
representation or not, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate of the first class, be punishable with
fine which may extend to one hundred thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months or with both. Any person found aiding and abetting him shall also be prosecuted
and punished.]. 4[28­A. Penalty of practicing without registration.-(1) No person, other than a registered
medical or dental practitioner, shall practice medicine or dentistry. (2) Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of sub­section (1) shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years but shall not be less than six months or
with fine which may extend to two hundred thousand rupees but shall not be less than one hundred
thousand rupees or with both. 28­B. Cognizance of offences.-(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence or matter
under this Ordinance except upon complaint in writing made by the authorized officer of the Council. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of
1898), it shall be lawful for any Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorized by this
Ordinance even if such sentence exceeds his powers under Section 32 of the said Code.]. 1Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.28. 2Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.29 and 30. 3Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.31. 4Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.32. 1[29. Privileges of registered medical or dental practitioners.-(1) A registered medical
practitioner and dentist shall have following privileges, namely: (a) valid registration shall be considered as a licence to practice medicine and dentistry in Pakistan and of a level mentioned by the Council in the registration certificate; (b) a registered medical practitioner or a registered dentist having valid full registration shall be competent to practice medicine or dentistry and prescribe allopathic medicine and
perform any surgical or interventional procedure on any patient; (c) a registered medical practitioner or a registered dentist having valid full registration may take admission for an additional qualification course; (d) to hold any medical or dental or relevant administrative appointment in any medical or dental institution or setup or hospitals or clinic or related health institution; (e) to hold a commission as a medical or dental officer in the Armed Forces; and (f) only a registered practitioner having valid registration is eligible to participate in the elections of the member of the Council. (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no medical certificate or proscription or advice shall be considered valid unless obtained from a
medical or dental practitioner having valid registration. (3) No person shall be entitled to recover any charge in any Court of law for any medical or
surgical advice or attendance or for the performance of any operation or intervention or for any
medicine prescribed or supplied unless he can prove upon the trial that he is a registered medical or
dental practitioner having valid registration.]. 1[30. Responsibilities of registered medical or dental practitioner.-(1) Every registered
medical or dental practitioner shall notify any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the
Registrar within sixty days of such transfer, failing which his name is liable to be struck off the
Register by order of the Federal Government either permanently or for such period as may be
specified therein. (2) No registered person shall use or publish in any way whatsoever any time, title, description or
symbol indicating or calculated to lead persons to infer that he possesses any additional or other
professional qualification unless the same has been conferred upon him by a legally constituted
authority within or outside Pakistan and which is recognized under this Ordinance. (3) Every registered medical practitioner or dental practitioner shall comply with the code of
medical ethics prescribed by the Council.]. 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, ss.33 and 34. 1[31. Removal of names from the Register. (1) The Council, in its discretion, may direct the
Registrar to remove altogether or for a specified period from the Register the name of any registered
medical practitioner or registered dentist who has been convicted by the disciplinary committee or by
any other Court of law of any such offence as implies in the opinion of the Council a defect of
character defined in the code of ethics of practice or who, after an inquiry at which opportunity has
been given to such person to be heard in person or through a pleader, has been convicted by the
disciplinary committee of the Council as guilty of professional negligence or incompetence or who
has shown himself to be until to continue in practice or on account of mental ill health or other
grounds as prescribed in the code of ethics of practice regulations. (2) The Council may also direct that any name removed from the Register under sub­section (1)
shall be restored. (3) For the purpose of an inquiry under sub­section (1), the disciplinary committee of the Council
shall exercise all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of
1908) for summoning the witnesses, for compelling the production of documents and for issuing
commissions with the help of law enforcing authorities. (4) The claim of professional negligence shall initially be established before the disciplinary
committee of the Council before any other proceedings.]. 2* * * * * * * 33. Power to make Regulations.­(1) The Council may, with the previous sanction of the
3[Federal Government], make Regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance, and,
without prejudice to the generality of this power, such Regulations may provide for (a) the management of the property of the Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts ; 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.35. 2Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s. 36. 3Subs. by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2 and Table, for “Central Government”. (b) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the times and places where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business thereat and the number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum ; (c) the powers and duties of the President and Vice­President ; (d) the mode of the appointment of the Executive Committee and other Committees, the summoning and holding of meetings, and the conduct of business of such Committees ; 1[(e) code of practice and ethics for the medical and dental practitioners; (f) the appointment, powers, duties and procedures of medical and dental inspectors; (g) the conditions and procedure for maintenance, compilation and publication of the Register of medical and dental practitioners and of health care providing facilities and their
minimum requirements and the fees to be charged for registration and, if necessary, for
opening of sub­offices or branches for this purpose;] 2[(gg) the fee for application under section 22A;] 1[(h) the procedure for any inquiry under sub­section (1) of Section 31; and (i) any matter for which under this Ordinance provision may be made by regulations.]; (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section (1), the Council shall make Regulations
which may provide for­ (a) prescribing a uniform minimum standard of courses of training for obtaining graduate and post­graduate medical and dental qualifications to be included or included respectively in
the First, Third and Fifth Schedules ; (
b) prescribing minimum requirements for the content and duration of courses of study as aforesaid ; (c) prescribing the conditions for admission to courses of training as aforesaid ; (d) prescribing minimum qualifications and experience required of teachers for appointment in medical and dental institutions ; 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012. s.37. 2Subs. ins. by Ord. VII of 1999, ss. 9­10 (valid upto 21­09­1999). (e) prescribing the standards of examinations, methods of conducting the examinations and other requirements to be satisfied for securing recognition of medical and dental
qualifications under this Ordinance ; 1[(f) prescribing the qualifications, experience and other conditions required for examiners for professional examinations in medicine and dentistry antecedent to the granting of
recognized medical and dental and additional medical and dental qualifications; (g) registration of medical or dental students at any medical or dental college or school or any university and the fees payable in respect of such registration; (h) laying down criteria including university affiliation, conditions and requirements for recognition and continuation of recognition and for grant of status of a teaching institution
of institutions and organizations under this Ordinance and on all connected matters of
inspection of medical and dental institutions for recognition and continuation of
recognition and inspection of examinations in these institutions and fee for such
inspections; (i) terms and conditions of service for all employees appointed under section 9; (j) election of members of the Council; and (k) prescribing a uniform minimum standard for continuous professional development for registered graduate and postgraduate medical and dental practitioners.]. 34. Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof. (1) the Council shall
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the 2[Federal Government] as it may require. (2) The 2[Federal Government] may publish, in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy,
abstract or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 21. 3[35. Commission of inquiry.-(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Federal Government
that the Council is not complying with any provisions of this Ordinance, the Federal Government may
refer the particulars of the complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons two of
whom shall be appointed by the Federal Government, including the chairman being at least a judge of
a High Court, and one member nominated by the Council after a resolution. (2) Such commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Federal
Government as to the truth of the matter charged in the complaint and in case of any charge of
default or of improper action being found by the commission to have been established, the
commission shall recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary. 1Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.37 (b). 2Subs. by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2 and Table, for “Central Government”. 3Subs. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.38. (3) The Federal Government shall forward the report of the commission of inquiry to the Council
for implementation and for remedial actions. The Council shall submit lo the Federal Government a
detailed plan of remedial measures to be adopted by the Council which shall be considered as
approved if no further orders are passed by the Federal Government in this regard within three
months. All remedial actions shall be taken by the Council within a stipulated period of six months
and the Council shall submit to the Federal Government a report of actions taken thereon. If the
Council fails to comply with the remedial measures forwarded to it by the Federal Government, the
Federal Government may by itself amend the regulations of the Council or make such provisions or
issue orders or take such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the recommendations of
the commission. (4) The commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of
witnesses and the production of documents and shall have other necessary powers for the purpose of
any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (Act V of 1908).]. 36. [Repeals, etc.] Omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981
(XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch.,II. 1[36­A. Over­ridding provision. The provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force. No
suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Council or any
committee thereof or any officer or servant of the Government or the Council for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Ordinance. 36­B. Transitory provision. Upon the commencement of the Medical and Dental Council
(Amendment) Act; 2012, the incumbent Council constituted under Section 3 shall stand dissolved and
the President, Vice­President of the Council and Executive Committee of the Council as exists before
the commencement of the aforesaid Act shall stay infact till a new President, Vice­President of the
Council, Executive Committee is elected by the Council. The President, Vice­President of the
Council and Executive Committee of the Council shall have the powers of the Council and shall
conduct elections for membership of the Council within one year.]. 1Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.39. THE FIRST SCHEDULE (See section 11) RECOGNISED MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN PAKISTAN. Medical Institution.
Recognized medical qualification.
Abbreviation for
registration. University of the
Punjab Licentiate in Medicine and Sur gery. L.M.S., Punjab. Bachelor of Medicine. M.B., Punjab Bachelor of Medicine and Bache lor
of Surgery. M.B.B.S., Punjab. Punjab State Medical
Faculty Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery
(when the holder of the qualification
had passed the F.Sc. (Medical
Group) examination of a recognised
University before taking up medical
studies. L.M.S. (P.S.M.F.) University of Karachi
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor
of Surgery. M.B.,B.S., Karachi. University of Sind
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor
of Surgery. M.B.,B,S. Sind. 1* *
* * *
* * University of
Peshawar Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor
of Surgery. M.B.,B.S., Peshawar. 1Omitted by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2 and Sch. THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See section 12) 1* * * * * * * THE THIRD SCHEDULE (See section 16)
RECOGNISED ADDITIONAL MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS Medical Institution.
Recognized Additional Medical
Qualification. Abbreviations for
Registration. PART ‘A’ GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN PAKISTAN University of the Punjab.
Doctor of Medicine ..
M.D. (Punjab). Master of Surgery ..
M.S. (Punjab). Diploma in Public Health.
D.P.H. (Punjab). Diploma in Ophthalmology.
D.O. (Punjab). Master of Philosophy (Bio ­ Chemistry).
M.Phil. Bio­Chemistry
(Karachi).] 2[Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Karachi). M.S. (Karachi). Master of Surgery .. 3[College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Pakistan). Fellow of the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Pakistan.
F.C.P.S. (Pak). Member of the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Pakistan.]
M.C.P.S. (Pak). 1Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.40. 2 Added by S.R.O. No. 1713 (I)/73. at 4­12­1973, see, Gaz. of P., 1973, Pt.­II, p­2450. 3Added by S.R.O. No. 620(K)/67, dt. 10­4­1967, see, Gaz. of P., 1967, Pt.,­I, p­382. PART ‘B’
GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE PAKISTAN India: *University of Bombay
Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Bombay). Master of Surgery .. M.S. (Bombay). *University of Calcutta
Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Calcutta). Master of Surgery .. M.S. (Calcutta). Diploma in Public Health. D.P.H. (Calcutta) Master of Obstetrics .. M.O. (Calcutta). *University of Lucknow
Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Lucknow). Master of Surgery .. M.S. (Lucknow). *University of Madras
Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Madras). Master of Surgery .. M.S. (Madras). *University of Patna .. Doctor of Medicine .. M.D. (Patna). Master of Surgery .. M.S. (Patna). *Andhra University .. Doctor of Medicine and
Master of Surgery. M.D., M.S., Andhra. United Kingdom:
1[Doctor of Philosophy
(Basis Medical Subjects) Ph. D. M.Sc. Master of Science .. (Basic Medical Subjects) * When granted on or before the 14th February, 1956. 1 Added by S.R.O. No. 916 (K)/66, dated, 8­9­1966, see Gaz. of P., 1966, Pt. I., p.497. 1
2
3 Post Graduate Diplomas D.A., D.A.P. & E. D. Bact., D.C.H.,
D.C.M.T., D.C.P. D.I.H., D.L.O.,
D.M.J., D.M.R.D.,
D.M.R.T., D.M.S.A.,
(Edin), D.O.Hyg., D.O.,
D.PhyS. Med., D.P.M.,
D.T.C.D., D.T.P.H. (Only
when granted after training
of atleast one academic
year)], Universities of: Birmingham, Bristol,
Cambridge, Durham,
Leeds, Liverpool, London,
Manchester, Oxford,
Shefield, Wales, Aberdeen,
Edinburgh, Glassgow
1[Exerter, New Castle
upon Tyne,] St. Andrews
and Bolfast. M.D. M.S. or M.Ch. Doctor of Medicine .. D.P.H. Master of Surgery .. Diploma in Public Health. Royal College of
Physicians of London. Member, Fellow M.R.C.P., F.R.C.P. (London). Royal College of Surgeons Fellow ..
F.R.C.S. (England). of London. Royal College of
Physicians of Edinburgh. Member, Fellow ..
M.R.C.P., F.R.C.P., (Edin). Royal College of Surgeons
of Edinburgh. Fellow F.R.C.S. (Edin.). Royal Faculty of
Physicians and Surgery of
Glasgow. Fellow ..
F.R.F.P.S. (Glasgow). 1 Ins. by S.R.O No. 916 (K)/66, dated, 8­9­1966, see Gaze. of P., 1966 Pt. I P. 497. 2[Diploma in Public
Health. D.P.H. (R.C.P.S. England] 1[Royal College of
Physicians and Surgeons,
England. D.P.H. (R.C.P.S.
England). Diploma in Public Health. Royal College of
Physicians and Surgeons
of Glasgow. Member, Fellow, Honorary M.R C.P. (Glasg.) Fellow F.R.C.P. (Glasg.) F.R.C.S. (Glasg.) Hon. F.R.C.P.S. (Glasg.)]. [Post­Graduate Diploma. D.A., D.A.P. & E.
D.Bact., D.C.H.,
D.C.M.T., D.C.P.,
D.I.H.., D.L.O., D.M.J.,
DMR. D. D.M.R.T.
D.M.S.A., (Edin), D.O.
Hyg., D.O., D.Obst. R.C.O.G.
D.P.H., D. Phys. Med.,
D.P.M., D.T.C.D.,
D.T.P.H. ( Only when granted after
training of at least one
academic year);] 1Added by S.R.O. No. 505 (K)/65, dated. 24­10­1965, see Gaz. of P., 1965, Pt. I., p. 498.) 2 Subs. by the Health Divn. Notifin No. S.R.O. 716(K)/65, dated the 26th August, 1965, for the existing entries, see Gaz. of P., 1965, Pt. I, p. 642. 3Added by S.R.O. No. 916 (K)/66, dated 8­9­1966, see Gaz. of P., 1966, Pt. I., pp. 457­458. Republic of Ireland: niversity of Dublin Doctor of
Medicine .. M.D. National University of Ireland. M.Ch. Master of
Surgery .. M.A.O. Master in
Obstetrics .. Royal College of Physicians of
Ireland. Member
Fellow .. M.R.C.P. (Ireland) F.R.C.P. (Ireland) Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland. Fellow ..
F.R.C.S (Ireland). 1[Diploma in
Obstetrics and
Gynaecology.] D.G.O.] 1[United States of America: Indiana University ..
Doctor of
Philosophy .. Ph. D. (Basic
Medical Subject).] 1 Added by the Health Divn. Notifn. No. S.R.O. 78(K)/65, dated the 20th January, 1965, see ibid., pp. 34­35. THE FOURTH SCHEDULE (See section 17)
1* * * * * * * THE FIFTH SCHEDULE (See section 18) RECOGNISED DENTAL QUALIFICATIONS Medical Institution.
Recognised Dental Qualification. Abbreviation for Registration. Bachelor of Dental Surgery. B.D.S. (Punjab). University of the Punjab Licentiate in Dental Surgery. L.D.S. (PSMF).] 2[Punjab State Medical Faculty. Bachelor of Dental Surgery. 3[University of Sind. Bachelor of Dental Surgery. B.D.S. (Sind). University of Peshawar. B.D.S. (Peshawar).] 4[THE SIXTH SCHEDULE (see Section 11­A) APPROVED HOSPITALS OR INSTITUTIONS S. No. Approved Hospitals or Institutions Specialties/Department THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE (see Section 16­B) CONTINUOUS PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY PROVIDERS IN PAKISTAN S. No. CPD Opportunity Provider THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE (see Section 16­C) SPECIALIST BOARDS S. No. Specialist Boards Specialties/Department.]. 1Omitted by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.40. 2Added by the Health Divn. Notifin. No. S.R.O. 111 (K)/66, dated the 29th January, 1966, see Gaz. of P., 1966, Pt. I, p. 78. 3 Added by S.R.O. No. 215 (K)/69, dated 9­1­1969, see Gaz. of P., 1969, Pt. I., p. 148. 4Ins. by Act No. XIX of 2012, s.41.