THE SECRETARIAT ALLOWANCE (RESCISSION OF ORDERS, ETC.) ORDINANCE, 2000 CONTENTS 1. Short title, extent and commencement 2. Rescission of certain orders 3. Removals of difficulties THE SECRETARIAT ALLOWANCE (RESCISSION OF ORDERS, ETC.) ORDINANCE, 2000 ORDINANCE No. XII of 2000 [30th March, 2000] An Ordinance to provide for rescission of certain orders relating to Secretariat Allowance WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for rescission of certain orders relating to Secretariat Allowance granted to certain employees of the Federal Government and to provide for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto; AND WHEREAS the National Assembly and the Senate stand suspended in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October, 1999, and the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 as amended; AND WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action; NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of Proclamation of the fourteenth day of October, 1999, and Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 as amended as well as Order No. 9 of 1999, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:- 1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Secretariat Allowance (Rescission of Orders, etc.) Ordinance, 2000. (2) It shall come into force at once. 2. Rescission of certain orders. (1) The orders, office memorandums, instructions and other instruments whereby the Secretariat Allowance was granted to certain Federal Government Employees in the Federal Secretariat, President's Secretariat, Prime Minister's Secretariat, National Assembly Secretariat, the Senate Secretariat and other organizations of the Federal Government and the orders, office memorandums, instructions and other instruments amending the aforesaid orders office memorandums, instructions and other instruments, hereinafter referred to as the orders, converting the Secretariat Allowance into Personal Allowance are hereby rescinded and shall be deemed always to have been so rescinded on the 1st July, 1988, and no financial benefit whatsoever, save and except as provided in sub-section (2), shall accrue or deemed to have accrued of become payable thereunder to the persons employed in the aforesaid Secretariats and other Organisations of the Federal Government notwithstanding any decision of any Court including a High Court and the Supreme Court. (2) Any order made, instruction issued, decision of any Court including a High Court or the Supreme Court implemented immediately before the commencement of this Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been validly made, issued and implemented and the amount of Secretariat Allowance including Personal Allowance already paid thereunder shall be deemed to have been validly paid and shall not be recoverable from the recipients of such allowances. 3. Removals of difficulties. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Federal Government may make such order as it may deem just and equitable to provide recompense for the benefit of the Federal Government Servants who were recipient of the Secretariat Allowance or the Personal Allowsance.