THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884 CONTENTS 1. Short title 2. Commencement 3. Repealed 4. Definitions 5. Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and importation of explosives 5A. Offences of minor and major violations 5B. Trial of offences 6. Power of the Federal Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport, import or export of specially dangerous explosives 6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or use, transport, import and export of explosives by young persons and certain other persons 6B. Jurisdiction 7. Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and removal 8. Notice of accidents 9. Inquiry into accidents 9A. Inquiry into more serious accidents 9B. Offences by companies 9C. Assistance by organizations, etc. 10. Forfeiture of explosives 11. Distress of Aircraft or vessel 12. Abetment and attempts 13. Power to arrest without warrant persons committing dangerous offences 14. Saving and power to exempt 15. Saving of Arms Act, 1878 16. Saving as to liability under other law 17. Extension of definition of “explosive” to other explosive substances 18. Procedure for making publication and confirmation of rules 19. Transportation of explosives by air 20. Removal of difficulties THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884 1ACT NO. IV OF 1884 [26th February, 1884] An Act to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and importation of Explosives. WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and importation of explosives; It is hereby enacted as follows: 1. Short Title. (1) This Act may be called the 2* Explosives Act, 1884; and 3[(2) Local extent. It extends to the whole of Pakistan]. 2. Commencement. (1) This Act shall come into force on such day4 as the 5[Federal Government], by notification in the 6[official Gazette], appoints: 7[* * * * * * *] 3.Repealed. 8[* * * * * * *] 4. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, 9[(1) “explosives” 1This Act has been declared, under s. 5, of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (Act No. XIV of 1874), to be in force in Baluchistan, see Gazette of India, 1931, Pt. II-A, p. 358. It has also been extended to the Leased Areas of Baluchistan, see the Leased Areas (Laws) Order, 1950 (G. G. O.3 of 1950); and applied in the Federated Areas of Baluchistan, see Gazette of India, 1937, Pt. I, p. 1499. This Act has been extended to the Baluchistan States Union, see the Baluchistan States Union (Federal Laws) (Extension) Order, 1953 (G. G. O. 4 of 1953), as amended by the Baluchistan States Union (Federal Laws) (Extension) (Second Amdt.) Order, 1953 (G. G. O. 19 of 1953). It has been extended to the State of Bahawalpur, see the Bahawalpur (Extension of Federal Laws) Order 1953 (G. G. O. 11 of 1953), as amended by the Bahawalpur (Extension of Federal Laws) (Amdt.) Order, 1953 (G. G. O. 21 of 1953). It has also been extended to the Khairpur State, see G. G. O. 5 of 1953, as amended by G. G. O. 24 of 1953. The Act has been and shall be deemed to have been brought into force in Gwadur with effect from the 8th September, 1958, by the Gwadur (Application of Central Laws) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXXVII of 1960), s. 2. It has been applied to Phulera in the Excluded Area of Upper Tanawal to the extent the Act is applicable in the N.W.F.P., subject to certain modi- fications; see N.W.F.P. (Upper Tanawal) (Excluded Area) Laws Regulation, 1950. It has been extended to the Excluded Area of Upper Tanawal other than Phulera by the N.W.F.P. (Upper Tanawal) (Excluded Area) Laws Regulation, 1950 and declared to be in force in that area with effect from 1st June, 1951, see N.W.F.P. Gazette, Extraordinary, dated 1-6-1951. For the law relating to explosive substances, see also the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (Act No. VI of 1908). 2Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances Order, 1949 (P. O. 4 of 1949). 3Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXI of 1960), s. 3 and 2nd Sch. (with effect from the 14th October, 1955). 4The 1st July 1887 see Gazette of India, 1887, Pt. I, p. 307. 5Subs. by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P. O. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Table. 6Subs. by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P. O. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Sch. 7Rep. by the Amending Act, 1891 (Act No. XII of 1891). 8Rep. by the Indian Ports Act, 1889 (Act No. X of 1889), s. 2 and Sch. II. 9Subs. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 3. (a) means gunpowder, nitroglycerine, nitroglycol, gun cotton, dinitrotoluence, trinitro toluene, picric acid, dinitro-phenol, trinitro resorcinol (styphnic acid), cyclo trimethylence trinitramine, penta erythritol tetranitrate, tetryl, nitroguanidine, lead azide, lead styphynate, fulminate of mercury or any other metal, diazo dinitro phenol, coloured fires or any other substances whether a single chemical compound or a mixture of substances, whether solid or liquid or gaseous used or manufactured with a view to produce a practical effect by explosion or pyrotechinic effect; and (b) includes, (i) chemical compounds, compositions or mixture of which will produce, upon release of its potential energy, a sudden outburst of gases, thereby exerting high pressures on its surroundings. Explosives may be solid, liquid or gas, nitro compound or in the form of water gel or slurry 1[emulsion]; (ii) fog signals, fireworks, fuses, rockets, precussion-caps, detonators, cartridges, ammunition of all descriptions and every adaptation or preparation of an explosives as defined in this clause; and (iii) such other substance as the Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this sub-section.] 1[(1A) “illegal activities” means any actions involving the manufacturing, storage, possession, procurement, sale, transport, import, export or use of explosives without any licence under this Act and rules made thereunder; (1B) “deliberate explosion” means incidents of any intentional acts or attempt thereof whether successful or failed involving the use, attempted use or preparation of improvised explosive devices attacks, using improvise explosive device precursors, which may include chemical, explosive, technical or physical materials; (1C) “major violations” means actions that cause significant risks to public life and their safety in terms of terrorism, involving unlawful trade or violate core provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder and includes unauthorized manufacturing of explosives, large scale possession without licence, smuggling or supplying explosives to criminals or any other person without having valid licence; (1D) “malicious intent” means a deliberate, willful or premeditated act to cause harm, endanger public life and their safety or violate the law with knowledge of its illegality and potential consequences and includes manufacturing explosives for terrorism, selling explosives to banned groups or proscribed organizations or intentionally bypassing explosives protocols;] 2[(2) “manufacture” includes the preparation of explosive or any component parts of an explosive, the admixture or other treatment of the same, the breaking up or unmaking of any explosive, 1Ins., and added by Act No. XVII of 2025, s.2 2Subs. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 3. or making fit for use any damaged explosive of the processing of any substance or matter with a view to causing an explosion, implosion or disintegration, and the process of remaking, altering or repairing any explosive;] 1[(2A) “minor violations” means procedural or technical violations by a licensee that do not directly endanger public life and their safety or do not involve in unlawful trade and includes failure to maintain records, operation on expired licences or minor storage non-compliance, cash payment or excess transportation; (2B) “non-malicious intent” means unintentional violations arising from negligence, lack of awareness or accidental circumstances without deliberate and harmful purpose and include administrative errors in licensing paperwork, accidental possession due to oversight or minor safety lapses;] (3) “vessel” includes every ship, boat and other vessel used in navigation, whether propelled by oars or otherwise: (4) “carriage” includes any carriage, wagon, cart, truck, vehicle or other means of conveying goods, or passengers by land, in whatever manner the same may be propelled: 2[(5) “master”, (a) in relation to any vessel or ship means any person, other than a pilot, harbour master, assistant harbour master or berthing master, having for the time being the charge or control of such vessel or aircraft, as the case may be; (b) in relation to any boat belonging to a ship, means the master of that ship; and (c) in relation to aircraft means captain of the aircraft;] (6) “import” means to bring into 3[Pakistan] by sea 2[, air] or land. 2[(7) “aircraft” means any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air, other than the reactions of the air against the earth’s surface, and includes balloons, whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines, for this ordinance aircraft means cargo aircraft; 2[(8) “export” means taking out of Pakistan to a place outside Pakistan by land, sea or air; (9) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules; and (10) “rules” means any rules made under the Act.] 1Added by Act No. XVII of 2025, s.2 2Subs., ins and added by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 3. 3Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXI of 1960), s. 3 and 2nd Sch. (with effect from the 14th October, 1955). 5. Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and importation of explosives. (1) The 1[Federal Government] 2[, in consultation with the provincial Governments,] may for any part of 3[Pakistan], 4[* * *] make rules consistent with this Act to regulate or prohibit, except under and in accordance with the conditions of a license granted as provided by those rules, the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport 2[, import and export] of explosives, or any specified class of explosives. (2) Rules under this section may provide for all or any of the following, among other matters, that is to say: (a) the authority by which licenses may be granted; (b) the fees to be charged for licenses, and the other sums (if any) to be paid for expenses by applicants for licenses; (c) the manner in which applications for licenses must be made, and the matters to be specified in such applications; (d) the form in which, and the conditions on and subject to which, licenses must be granted; (e) the period for which licenses are to remain in force; 2[*] (f) the exemption absolutely or subject to conditions of any explosives from the operation of the rules 2[;] 2[(g) the authority to which appeals may be preferred and the procedure to be followed by such authority; (h) the total quantity of explosives that a licensee may possess in a given period of time; and (i) the import and export of explosives by land, sea or air.] (3) 5[* * * * * * *] 5[5A. Offences of minor and major violations. (1) Where a licensee commits no minor violations which are non-malicious, he shall be liable to an administrative penalty not exceeding half a million rupees. 1Subs. by the Central Adaption of Laws Order, 1964 (P. O. 1 of 1964), Art. 2 and Sch. 2Ins., subs. & omitted by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 3. 3Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No. XXI of 1960), s. 3 and 2nd Sch. (with effect from the 14th October, 1955). 4Rep. by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. 5Omitted and Ins. by Act No. XVII of 2025, ss. 3 and 4. (2) Where a licensee commits minor violations which are malicious, he shall be liable to an administrative penalty not exceeding one million rupees. (3) Where a licensee commits major violations which are non-malicious, he shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding ten million rupees or both. (4) Where a licensee commits major violations which are malicious, he shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding seven years or a fine not exceeding twenty million rupees or both. (5) Whoever commits any act involving the manufacturing, storage, possession, procurement, sale, transport, import, export or use of explosives without any licence under this Act and rules made thereunder shall be liable to the punishments provided for in the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (VI of 1908). 5B. Trial of offences. The offences under this Act and under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (VI of 1908) shall be tried by the Anti-terrorism Court established under the Anti-terrorism Act, 1997 (XXVII of 1997).] 1[6. Power of the Federal Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport, import or export of specially dangerous explosives. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Federal Government may from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, prohibit, either absolutely or subject to conditions, the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport, import or export of any explosive which is of so dangerous a character that, in the opinion of the Federal Government, it is expedient for the public safety to issue such notification. (2) The Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969), shall have effect in relation to any explosive with regard to the importation of which a notification has been issued under sub -section (1), and the vessel, carriage or aircraft containing such explosive, as the said Act, have has in relation to any article the importation of which is prohibited or regulated thereunder, and shall apply accordingly to the vessel, carriage or aircraft containing such article. (3) Any person manufacturing, possessing, using, selling, transporting, importing or exporting any explosive in contravention of a notification issued under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 2[two million] rupees, and, in the case of importation by water , the owner and master of the vessel and in the case of importation by air, the owner and the master of the aircraft, in which the explosive is imported shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse, each be punishable with fine which may extend to 2[two million] rupees. 1[6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or use, transport, import and export of explosives by young persons and certain other persons. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act (a) any person 1Subs.& ins. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 5 2Subs. by Act No. XVII of 2025, s. 5. (i) who has not completed the age of eighteen years; or (ii) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence involving violence or moral turpitude for a term of not less than six months at any time during a period of five years after the expiration of the sentence; or (iii) who has been ordered to execute under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), a bond for keeping the peace or for good behavior, at anytime during the terms of the bond; or (iv) whose licence under this Act has been cancelled, for contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, at any time during a period of five years from the date of cancellation of such licence; shall not- (i) manufacture, sell, transport import or export any explosive; or (ii) possess or use any such explosive as the Federal Government may, having regard to the nature thereof, by notification in the official Gazette, specify; and (b) no person shall sell, deliver or dispatch any explosive to a person whom he knows or has reason to believe at the time of such sale, delivery or dispatch- (i) to be prohibited under clause (a) to manufacture, sell, use, transport, import, export, or possess such explosive; or (ii) to be of unsound mind or having physical disability. (2) Whoever (a) manufactures, possesses, sells, transports, imports or exports any explosive in contravention of the provision of clause (a) of sub-section (1); or (b) sells, delivers or dispatches any explosive in contravention of the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1). shall be punishable with a fine 1[which may extend to two million] rupees.] 1[6B. Jurisdiction. (1) The administrative penalties under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 5A shall be imposed by the Department of Explosives in the prescribed manner. 1Subs., and ins. by Act No. XVII of 2025, ss.6 and 7. (2) The Anti-terrorism Court established under the Anti-terrorism Act, 1997 (XXVII of 1997) shall have jurisdiction to try the offences under sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 5A. (3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of Anti-terrorist Court under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal before the concerned High Court within thirty days from the date of communication of such decision or order.] 7. Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and removal. (1) The 1[Federal Government] 2[* * *] may make rules consistent with this Act authorizing any officer, either by name or in virtue of his office- (a) to enter, inspect and examine any place, carriage 1[, aircraft] or vessel in which an explosive is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, transported 1[, exported] or imported under a license granted under this Act, or in which he has reason to believe that an explosive has been or is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, transported 1[, exported] or imported in contravention of this Act or of the rules made under this Act; (b) to search for explosives therein; (c) to take samples of any explosive found therein on payment of the value thereof; and (d) to seize, detain, remove and, if necessary, destroy any explosive found therein. (2) The provisions of the 3[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898(Act V of 1898)] relating to searches under that Code shall, so far as the same are applicable, apply to searches by officers authorized by rules under this section. 8. Notice of accidents. 4[(1)] Whenever there occurs in or about, or in connection with, any place in which an explosive is manufactured, possessed or used, or any carriage 1[,aircraft] or vessel either conveying an explosive or on or from which an explosive is being loaded or unloaded, any accident by explosion or by fire attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or property, or of a description usually attended with such loss or injury, the occupier of the place, or the master of the vessel 1[or aircraft],or the person in charge of the carriage, as the case may be, shall 4[within such time and in such manner as may be by rule prescribed give notice thereof and of the attendant loss of human life or personal injury, if any, to the 5[Director General Explosives] and to the officer in charge of the nearest police-station. 4[(2) Whoever in contravention of sub-section (1) fails to give notice of any accident shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 5[half a million] rupees or if the accident is attended by loss 1Ins. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, ss. 7 and 8. 2Rep. by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. 3Subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (Ordinance No. XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch., II. 4Re-numbered, subs., and added by Ordinance, 1945 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 1945), s. 2. 5Subs. by Act No. XVII of 2025, ss. 8 and 10. of human life, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.] 1[9.Inquiry into accidents. (1) Where any accident such as is referred to in section 8 occurs in or about or in connection with any place, carriage 2[, aircraft] or vessel under the control of any of 3[the armed forces of Pakistan], an inquiry into the causes of the accident shall be held by the naval, military, or air force authority concerned, and where any such accident occurs in any other circumstances, the district Magistrate 4[* * *] shall, in cases attended by loss of human life, or may, in any other case, hold or direct a Magistrate sub-ordinate to him to hold, such an inquiry. (2) Any person holding an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Magistrate in holding an inquiry into an offence under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898(V of 1898) and may exercise such of the powers conferred on any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think it necessary or expedite to exercise for the purposes of the inquiry. (3) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the 2[Federal Government] stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances. (4) The 2[Federal Government] may make rules (a) to regulate the procedure at inquiries under this section; (b) to enable the 5[Director General Explosives] to be present or represented at any such inquiry; (c) to permit the 5[Director General Explosives] or his representative to examine any witnesses at the inquiry; (d) to provide that where the 5[Director General Explosives] is not present or represented at any such inquiry, a report of the proceedings thereof shall be sent to him; (e) to prescribe the manner in which and the time within which notices referred to in section 8 shall be given. 9A. Inquiry into more serious accidents.⎯ (1) The 2[Federal Government] may, where it is of opinion, whether or not it has received the report of an inquiry under section 9, that an inquiry of more formal character should be held into the causes of an accident such as is referred to in section 8, appoint the 5[Director General Explosives] or any other competent person to hold such inquiry, and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry. 1Subs. by Ordinance No. XVIII of 1945, s. 2. 2Ins., and subs. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, ss. 9 and 2. 3Subs. by the Central Laws (Adaptation) Order, 1961 (P. O. 1 of 1961), Art 2 and Sch. (with effect from the 23rd March, 1956). 4Omitted by the Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances Order, 1949 (P. O. 4 of 1949), Sch. 5Subs. by Act No. XVII of 2025, s. 10. (2) Where the 1[Federal Government] orders an inquiry under this section, it may also direct that any inquiry under section 9 pending at the time shall be discontinued. (3) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(V of 1908), for the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents and material objects; and every person required by such person as aforesaid to furnish any information shall be deemed to be legally bound so to do within the meaning of section 176 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860). (4) Any person holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers conferred on any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think it necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes of the inquiry. (5) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the 1[Federal Government] stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding any observations which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make; and the 1[Federal Government] shall cause every report so made to be published at such time and in such manner as it may think fit. (6) The 1[Federal Government] may make rules for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this section.] 1[9B. Offences by companies Where the person guilty of an offence under this Act, is a company, corporation, firm or institution, every director, partner and concerned employee of the company, corporation, firm or institution shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or consent, be guilty of the offence.] 2[9C. Assistance by organizations, etc. (1) In performance of his functions, the Director General Explosives may by an order in writing (a) call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying himself whether there has been any contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder; (b) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing useful or relevant to the inquiry or investigation under this Act: (c) examine any person acquainted with the facts; or (d) seek expert opinion by co-opting any person in service of the Federal or Provincial Government or any body under control of such Government. (2) The information, expert opinion or assistance sought by the Director General Explosives under sub-section (1) shall be provided by the person from whom such information, expert opinion or assistance is sought.] 1Ins., and subs. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, ss. 2 and 10. 2Ins. by Act No. XVII of 2025, s. 9. 10. Forfeiture of explosives. When a person is convicted of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made under this Act, the Court before which he is convicted may direct that the explosive, or ingredient of the explosive, or the substance (if any) in respect of which the offence has been committed, or any part of that explosive, ingredient or substance, shall, with the receptacles containing the same, be forfeited. 1[11. Distress of aircraft or vessel. Where the owner or master of any aircraft or vessel is adjudged under this Act or the rules, to pay a fine for any offence committed with, or in relation to, that aircraft or vessel, the Court may, in addition to any other power it may have for the purpose of compelling payment of the fine, direct it to be levied by distress and sale of, (a) the aircraft and its furniture or so much of the furniture; or (b) the vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture of such vessel or so much of the tackle, apparel and furniture thereof, as is necessary for the payment of the fine.] 12. Abetment and attempts. Whoever abets, within the meaning of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860), the commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or the rules made under this Act, or attempts to commit any such offence and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the same, shall be punished as if he had committed the offence. 13. Power to arrest without warrant persons committing dangerous offences. Whoever is found committing any act for which he is punishable under this Act or the rules under this Act, and which tends to cause explosion or fire in or about any place where an explosive is manufactured or stored, or any railway or port, or any carriage, 1[aircraft or vessel], may be apprehended without a warrant by a Police-officer, or by the occupier of, or the agent or servant of, or other person authorized by the occupier of, that place, or by any agent or servant of, or other person authorized by, the railway administration of conservator of the port 1[or the officer-in-charge of the air port], and be removed from the place where he is arrested and conveyed as soon as conveniently may be before a 6[Judicial Magistrate]. 2[14. Saving and power to exempt. (1) Nothing in this Act, except sections 8, 9 and 9A, shall apply to the manufacture, possession, use, transport or 1[, import and export] of any explosive- (a) by any of 3[the armed forces of Pakistan] in accordance with rules or regulations made by 3[* * *] the 4[Federal Government]; (b) by any person employed under 5[the 1[Federal Government] 4[* * *]] in execution of this Act. 1Subs. & ins. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, ss. 11, 12 and 14. 2Subs. by Ordinance No. XVIII of 1945, s. 4. 3Subs., and omitted by the Central Laws Adaptation Order, 1961 (P. O. 1 of 1961), Art 2 and Sch. (with effect from the 23rd March, 1956). 4Subs., and omitted by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P. O. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Sch. 5Subs. by the Central Adaptation of Laws Order, 1964 (P. O. 1 of 1964), Art. 2 and Sch. 6Subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (Ordinance No. XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and Sch., II. (2) The 1[Federal Government] may by notification in the official Gazette exempt, absolutely or subject to any such conditions as it may think fit to impose, any explosive from all or any of the provisions of this Act. 15. Saving of Arms Act, 1878. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Arms Act,1878 2[and the Pakistan Arms Ordinance, 1965 (W.P. Ordinance No. XX of 1965).] Provided that an authority granting a license under this Act for the manufacture, possession sale, transport 1[,import and export] of an explosive may, if empowered in this behalf by the rules under which the license is granted, direct by an order written on the license that it shall have the effect of a like license granted under the said Arms Act (XI of 1878). 16. Saving as to liability under other law. Nothing in this Act or the rules under this Act shall prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Act or those rules, or from being liable under that other law to any other or higher punishment or penalty than that provided by this Act or those rules: Provided that a person shall not be punished twice for the same offence. 17. Extension of definition of “explosive” to other explosive substances. The 1[Federal Government] may, from time to time, by notification in the 3[official Gazette], declare4 that any substance which appears to the 1[Federal Government] to be specially dangerous to life or property, by reason either of its explosive properties or of any process in the manufacture thereof being liable to explosion, shall be deemed to be an explosive within the meaning of this Act, and the provisions of this Act (subject to such exceptions, limitations and restrictions as may be specified in the notification) shall accordingly extend to that substance in like manner as if it were included in the definition of the term “explosive” in this Act. 18. Procedure for making publication and confirmation of rules. 5(1) An authority making rules under this Act shall, before making the rules, publish a  of the proposed rules for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby. (2) The publication shall be made in such manner as the 1[Federal Government], from time to time, by notification in the 3[official Gazette] prescribes. (3) There shall be published with the  a notice specifying a date at or after which the  will be taken into consideration. (4) The authority making the rules shall receive and consider any objection or suggestion which may be made by any person with respect to the  before the date so specified. 1Subs. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, ss. 2 and 14. 2Ins. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (Ordinance No. XXVII of 1981), s. 3 and 2nd Sch. 3Subs. by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. 4Picric acid with certain exceptions has been declared to be an Explosive within the meaning of this Act, see Gazette of India, 1926, Pt. I, p. 1264. 5Sub-sections (1) to (4) of section 18 were deemed to have been omitted during the Continuance of the Explosives (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1945 (Ordinance No. XVIII of 1945), since rep. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1951 (Act No. XXVI of 1951), s. 2. (5) A rule made under this Act shall not take effect 1[***] until it has been published in the 1[official Gazette], 1[* * *]. (6) The publication in the 1[official Gazette] of a rule purporting to be made under this Act shall be conclusive evidence that it has been duly made, and, if it requires sanction, that it has been duly sanctioned. (7) All powers to make rules conferred by this Act may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires. 2[19. Transportation of explosives by air. The transportation of explosives by air shall be carried out by cargo and other permissible aircraft and not by passenger aircraft in accordance with the rules and regulations of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Air Transport Association (IATA) and Civil Aviation Authority of Pakistan (CAA). 20. Removal of difficulties. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Ordinance, the Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, as may appear to it to be appropriate or necessary for the purpose of removing such difficulty.] Dated. 07-07-2025 1Rep., and subs. by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. 2Ins. by Ordinance No. CV of 2002, s. 15.