THE MEDICAL OFFICERS (REGULARIZATION OF APPOINTMENTS) ACT, 1992 CONTENTS 1. Short title and commencement 2. Definition 3. Regularization of appointments of Medical Officer 4. Seniority THE MEDICAL OFFICERS (REGULARIZATION OF APPOINTMENTS) ACT, 1992 ACT NO. XVI OF 1992 An act to provide for the regularization of the appointments certain medical officers appointed on adhoc basis WHEREAS it is expedient to provide or the regularization of the appointment of certain medical officers appointed on adhoc basis; It is hereby enacted as follows :- 1. Short title and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Medical Officers (Regularization of Appointments) Act. 1992. (2) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definition. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Medical Officers” mean (a) those appointed as Medical Officers in institutions under the Health Division, and (b) those appointed as RMOs in the National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases. 3. Regularization of appointments of Medical Officer.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), or the rules made thereunder or the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), or the rules made thereunder, a Medical Officer who was approved, at any time preceding the twelveth day of October, 1988, for appointment as Medical Officer on adhoc basis and is holding office as such at the commencement of this Act, shall, on an order being made by the Federal Government in that behalf, be deemed to have been appointed on regular basis in the cadre of Medical Officers in the Federal Government with effect from the date of the commencement of this Act. (2) An order under sub-section (1) shall not be made in respect of a person unless, in the opinion of the Committee referred to in sub-section (3), his character and antecedents have been verified as satisfactory and he holds or possesses the domicile, qualifications and experience, and is within the age limit, required for the office. (3) The Committee shall consist of the Director General of Health, Government of Pakistan, who shall be its Chairman, the Joint Secretary (Administration), Health Division, and one nominee of the Establishment Division not below the rank of Joint Secretary. 4. Seniority.- (1) A medical officer whose appointment is regularized under this Act shall rank junior to a medical officer belonging to the same service or cadre who is- (a) holding a post on regular basis at the commencement of this Act; and (b) appointed on the recommendation of the Federal Public Service Commission made before the commencement of this Act. (2) The inter-se seniority of the medical officers whose appointments are regularized under this Act shall, within the same service or cadre, be determined on the basis of their continuous appointment in such service on cadre; Provided that, where the date of continuous appointment of two or more such officers in the same, the older in age shall rank senior to the younger in age.