THE EX-GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (EMPLOYMENT WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS) (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1966 CONTENTS 1. Short title, extend and commencement 2. Definitions 3. Prohibition of employment etc. 4. Penalty  THE EX-GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (EMPLOYMENT WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS) (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1966 1ACT No. XII of 1966 [7th July, 1966] An Act to prohibit ex-Government servants from seeking or taking up employment with a foreign Government or foreign agency WHEREAS in the interest of the security of Pakistan, it is expedient to prohibit ex-
Government servants from seeking or taking up employment with a foreign Government or foreign agency; AND WHEREAS the national interest in relation to the security of Pakistan requires Central legislation in the matter under clause (2) of Article 131 of the Constitution; It is hereby enacted as follows:― 1. Short title, extent and commencement.― (1) This Act may be called the Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) (Prohibition) Act, 1966. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant, in the subject or context,- (a) “ex-Government servant” means any person who was, at any time, appointed or employed as an officer or servant of the 2[Federal Government] or a Provincial Government and has ceased to be so appointed or employed; (b) “foreign agency” means any office or establishment of the diplomatic or consular representative of a foreign Government by whatever name called, and includes any information, public relations, trade or commercial agency, service centre or foundation established or maintained by any such Govern-
ment or by any person who is a national of a foreign country ; and (c) “foreign Government” means the Government of a foreign country. 3. Prohibition of employment etc. ― (1) No ex-Government servant shall, except with the previous permission in writing of the 2[Federal Government], 3[or a person or authority authorized by it in this behalf] seek or take up employment as an officer or servant of a foreign government or a foreign agency. (2) No ex-Government servant who is, at the commencement of this Act, in the service of a foreign government or a foreign agency shall, except with the permission in writing of the 4[Federal Government], continue in such service after the expiry of three months from such commencement. 5[4. Penalty. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven year, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with forfeiture of property, or with any two or more of the said punishments.]. 1 For Statement of Objects and reasons, see Gaz. of P., 1966, Ext., P. 335 (R) 2 Subs. by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2 and Table, for “Central Government”. 3 Ins. by the Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Government) (Prohibition) (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1984 (29 of 1984), s.2. 4 Subs. by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2 and Table, for “Central Government. 5 Subs. by the Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Government) (Prohibition) (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1982 (11 of 1982), s. 2 for section 4.