THE KARACHI ELECTRIC SUPPLY CORPORATION (REMOVAL FROM SERVICE) ORDINANCE, 1999 CONTENTS 1. Short title and commencement 2. Removal of certain persons from service, etc. THE KARACHI ELECTRIC SUPPLY CORPORATION (REMOVAL FROM SERVICE) ORDINANCE, 1999 1ORDINANCE NO. XVII OF 1999 [24th September, 1999] An Ordinance to provide for removal from service of the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for removal from the service of the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation for the purpose hereinafter appearing; AND WHEREAS the National Assembly is not in session and the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action; NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 89 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the President is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance ;- 1. Short title and commencement. -(1) This Ordinance may be called the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation (Removal from Service) Ordinance, 1999. (2) It shall come into force at once. 2. Removal of certain persons from service, etc. -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, contract, settlement or award for the time being in force, or in the terms and conditions of service of any person employed by, or serving under, the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation, the Corporation may, at any time,- (a) retire from its service any person without assigning any reason; or (b) remove from its service any person after informing him in writing of the grounds on which such action is proposed to be taken and giving him an opportunity of showing cause against the action within fourteen days. (2) Where a person is retired from service under subsection (1), he shall, in addition to the retiring benefits admissible to him under the terms and conditions of his service, if any, be paid additional pay for three months.  1Shall not be subject to the limitation as to its duration prescribed in the Constitution, see P.C.O. (I of 1999), Art. 5A (I).