THE INTERNATIONAL ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY ORDINANCE, 1985 CONTENTS CHAPTER I THE PRILIMINARY 1. Short title and commencement 2. Definitions 3. CHAPTER II THE UNIVERSITY 4. Establishment of the University 5. Powers and functions of the University 6. University open to all classes, creeds, etc 7. Teaching in the University CHAPTER III OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 8. Officers of the University 9. Chancellors 10. Visitation 11. Pro-Chancellor 12. Rector 13. President 14. Vice-Presidents 15. Other Officers CHAPTER IV AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY 16. Authorities 17. Board of Trustees 18. Meetings of the Board of Trustees 19. Board of Governors 20. Meetings of the Board of Governors 21. Powers of the Board of Governors 22. Academic Council 23. Powers and duties of the Academic Council 24. Constitution, functions and powers of other Authorities 25. Appointment of Committees by the Authorities 26. The academic and administrative staff 27. Academic freedom CHAPTER V STATUTES, REGULATIONS AND RULES 28. Statutes 29. Regulations 30. Rules CHAPTER VI THE UNIVERSITY FUND 31. University Fund 32. Payments 33. Accounts 34. Audit 35. Annual statement of accounts CHAPTER VII GENERAL PROVISIONS 36. Retirement from service 37. Opportunity to show cause 38. Appeal to, and review by, the Board of Governors 39. Pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund 40. Commencement of term of office of members of authorities 41. Filling of casual vacancies in Authorities 42. Filling of vacancies in Authorities in Certain Circumstances 43. Disputes about membership of Authorities, etc. 44. Proceeding of Authorities not invalidated by vacancies 45. First Statutes 46. Bar of Jurisdiction 47. Indemnity 48. Transitional provisions 49. Repeal and savings 50. Trust 51. Removal of difficulties THE SCHEDULE. (The First Statutes) ANNEX I. (Islamic Research Institute) ANNEX II. (International Institute of Islamic Economics) ANNEX III. (Shariah Academy) ANNEX IV. (Academy for Da'wah Training of Imams) THE INTERNATIONAL ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY ORDINANCE, 1985 ORDINANCE No. XXX OF 1985 [31st March, 1985] An Ordinance to reconstitute and re-organize the Islamic University WHEREAS it is expedient to establish an international seat of Islamic learning in Pakistan so as to provide every opportunity for an all round and harmonious development of individuals and society and reconstruction of human thought in all its form on the foundations of Islam; AND WHEREAS the Islamic University, Islamabad, working to achieve these objectives, has now reached a stage when it can be reconstituted to become an autonomous International Islamic University in order to encourage and promote education, training and research in Islamic learning, social, natural, applied and communication sciences and other branches of learning to ensure the Muslim Ummah’s ideological, moral, intellectual, social, economic and technological development in accordance with the values, ideals, principles and norms of Islam ; AND WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action; NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance: CHAPTER I THE PRILIMINARY 1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Ordinance may be called the International Islamic University Ordinance, 1985. (2) It shall come into force at once. 2. Definitions. In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, (a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University ; (b) “Academy” means an Academy of the University ; (c) “Authority” means an authority of the University as specified in this Ordinance; (d) “Board of Trustees” means the Board of Trustees referred to in this Ordinance; (e) “Board of Governors” means the Board of Governors of the University ; (f) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University ; (g) “Dean” means the head of a faculty or other teaching, research or training unit of the University; (h) “Director” or “Director General” means the head of an Academy, Institute or Centre ; (i) “Government” means the Federal Government; (j) “Institute” means a constituent/self-governing Institute maintained and administered by the University ; (k) “prescribed” means prescribed by Statutes, Regulations or Rules ; (l) “President” means the President of the University ; (m) “Pro-Chancellor” means the Pro­Chancellor of the University ; (n) “Rector” means the Rector of the University ; (o) “Statutes” “Regulations” and “Rules” means the Statutes, Regulations and Rules made or deemed to have been made under this Ordinance ; (p) “Trust” means the International Islamic University Trust established in Pakistan or abroad to support the University; (q) “Teachers” include whole time Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and research staff engaged by the University for teaching at the University and such other persons as may be recognised to be Teachers by the Board of Governors ; (r) “University” means the International Islamic University as constituted under this Ordinance; and (s) “Vice-President” means Vice-President of the University. CHAPTER II THE UNIVERSITY 4. Establishment of the University. (1) On the commencement of this Ordinance, the Islamic University established under the Islamic University Ordinance, 1980 (LIII of 1980), shall be re- constituted and re-named as the International Islamic University with its principal seat at Islamabad. (2) The University shall consist of : (i) the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Rector, the President, the Directors­General, the Vice­Presidents, the Deans, and the Directors ; (ii) members of the Board of Trustees, the Board of Governors, the Academic Council and other Authorities ; (iii) Teachers ; and (iv) such other officers as may be prescribed. (3) The University shall be a body corporated by the name of the International Islamic University having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued. (4) The University shall be competent to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable and immovable property which may have vested in it or acquired by it in and outside Pakistan. (5) The University shall be the custodian of the Faisal Mosque, Islamabad, and the buildings attached to the Mosque and shall be responsible for its supervision, control and maintenance. 5. Powers and functions of the University. (1) The University shall make arrangements for the promotion and dissemination of knowledge and for instruction, training and research in such fields as the University may determine. (2) The University shall produce skilled manpower for effective implementation of Islamic laws and management of Islamic Institutions in Pakistan and the rest of the Muslim World. (3) The University shall be a fully autonomous body with freedom to govern its academic functions in order to achieve its objectives. (4) The University shall have the powers to: (a) admit, teach and examine students ; (b) award degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions ; (c) determine and prescribe courses of study in such branches of learning as the University may determine ; (d) provide for instruction, training and research in such branches of learning and at such levels, as it may determine ; (f) decide teaching methods and strategies in order to ensure the most effective educational and other programmes ; (g) institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships, Research Associateships and any other positions, and to appoint persons thereto under prescribed conditions ; (h) create posts for teaching, research, extension, administration and other related purposes and to appoint persons thereto under prescribed conditions ; (i) institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, medals and prizes and prescribe conditions for their dispensation ; (j) establish Academies, Institutes, Faculties, Departments, Research and Training Centres, Libraries, Laboratories, Workshops, Museums and such other establishments as may be necessary from time to time, and other centres of learning for the development of teaching and research and to make such arrangements for their maintenance, management and administration as it may determine ; (k) establish and control the residences of the students, scholars and trainees of the University and to institute and maintain halls of residence ; (l) confer in the manner prescribed, honorary degrees, Emeritus Professorships or other distinctions on persons approved for the purpose ; (m) confer degrees on persons who have conducted independent research under prescribed condition ; (n) determine the equivalence of the examinations passed, and the periods of study spent, by students of the University at other Universities and places of learning and to review such equivalence, if necessary ; (o) supervise and control the discipline of students of the University, promote co-curricular and recreational activities of such students, and make arrangements for promoting their health, Islamic personality, morality and general welfare in accordance with Islamic values ; (p) demand and receive such fees and other charges as it may determine from time to time ; (q) make provisions for research, training and advisory services and with these objectives to enter into arrangements with other institutions or with public bodies under prescribed conditions ; (r) enter into, execute, vary or cancel agreements, contracts and other arrangements with governments, organizations, institutions, bodies and individuals for the purpose of carrying out its functions and activities ; and (s) receive and manage properties, grants, donations, endowments, bequests, trusts, gifts and other contributions in Pakistan and abroad and administer, transfer or invest the funds so received and apply as much of its income to the maintenance and development of the University and its constituent establishments as it may deem fit ; (5) Without prejudice to the generality of the above provisions, all powers not allocated to any other body of the University shall vest in the University to conduct its affairs and it may do all such other acts and things, as may be requisite in order to further the objects of the University. 6. University open to all classes, creeds, etc. The University shall be open to all persons of either sex of whatever religion, race, creed, class or color who desire to receive higher education with Islamic orientation and no such person shall be denied the privileges of the University on the ground only of sex, religion, race, caste, creed, class, colour or domicile. 7. Teaching in the University. (1) All recognized teaching in various courses shall be conducted by the University in the prescribed manner. (2) The objective of all teaching at the University shall be to lay emphasis on the seeking of knowledge rather than on examinations and degrees, and, therefore, in addition to formal education, the University may organize as many non-degree courses, classes, seminars, colloquia and workshops as possible. (3) The authority responsible for organising recognized teaching shall be such as may be prescribed. (4) The courses and the curricula shall be such as may be prescribed. CHAPTER III OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 8. Officers of the University. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely : (i) the Chancellor ; (ii) the Pro­Chancellor; (iii) the Rector ; (iv) the President; (v) the Directors­General of Academies ; (vi) the Vice­President(s) ; (vii) the Deans ; (viii) the Directors ; and (ix) such other persons as may be prescribed by Regulations to be the officers. 9. Chancellor. (1) The President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan shall be the Chancellor of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall, when present, preside at the convocation of the University and the meeting of the Board of Trustees. (3) If the Chancellor is satisfied that any regulation or rule, or proceedings of any Authority are not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Statutes, the Regulations or the Rules, he may refer them to the Board of Trustees for reconsideration. (4) Every proposal to confer an honorary degree shall be subject to confirmation by the Chancellor. (5) The Chancellor may remove any person from the membership of any Authority, if such person. (i) has become of unsound mind ; or (ii) has become subject to an incapacity which prevents him from functioning as a member of such Authority ; or (iii) has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude ; or (iv) has been found involved in activities detrimental to the interests of the University. 10. Visitation.- (1) The Chancellor or the Pro-Chancellor may cause an inspection or inquiry to be made in respect of any matter connected with the affairs of the University and shall, from time to time, appoint such person or persons as he may deem fit for the purpose of carrying out inspection of:- (i) the University, its buildings, laboratories; libraries, museums, work­shops and equipment ; (ii) any institution or hostel maintained by the University ; (iii) the teaching, research and other work conducted by the University; and (iv) the conduct of examination held by the University. (2) The Chancellor or the Pro-Chancellor shall give notice to the Board of Governors of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made under sub-section (1) and the Board of Governors shall be entitled to be represented thereat. (3) The Chancellor or the Pro-Chancellor shall communicate to the Board of Governors his views with regard to the results of an inspection or inquiry made under sub-section (1) and shall, after ascertaining the views of the Board of Governors thereon, advise the Board of Governors, on the action to be taken by it. (4) The Board of Governors shall, within such time as may be specified, communicate to him such action, if any, as has been taken or may be proposed to be taken upon the results of an inspection or inquiry communicated to it under sub-section (3). (5) If the Board of Governors does not, within the specified time, take action to the satisfaction of the Chancellor or the Pro-Chancellor, he may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board of Governors, issue such directions as he thinks fit, and the Rector shall comply with such directions. 11. Pro-Chancellor.-(1) The Chancellor shall appoint a scholar of international repute or an educationist of distinction as Pro-Chancellor for such period and on such terms and conditions as he may determine. (2) The Pro-Chancellor shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocation of the University and at any meeting where business of the University is being considered. (3) The Pro-Chancellor shall perform such functions as the Chancellor may delegate to him from time to time. 12. Rector.-(1) The Chancellor shall appoint a scholar of international repute or an educationist of distinction as Rector for such period and on such terms and conditions as he may determine. (2) The Rector, in the absence of the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor, shall preside at the convocation of the University and the meetings of the Board of Trustees and when present he shall preside over the meetings of the Authorities. (3) The Rector shall exercise general control and supervision over the affairs of the University and shall ensure that the provisions of this Ordinance, the Statutes, the Regulations, the Rules, policies and directions of the Board of Trustees are properly executed. (4) The Rector shall submit the plans of work, the budget, as approved by the Board of Governors, and a report on the activities of the University to the Board of Trustees. (5) The Rector shall perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor or the Board of Trustees. 13. President. (1) The President shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees, out of a panel to be recommended by the Rector, on such terms and conditions as the Board of Trustees may determine and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Board of Trustees for a term not exceeding four years. (2) At any time when the office of the President is vacant or the President is absent or is unable to perform the functions of his office due to illness or some other cause, the Rector shall, so far as may be, in consultation with the President, appoint one of the Vice-Presidents to perform the duties of the President. (3) The President shall have the following powers and duties, namely:- (a) The President shall be the academic and administrative officer of the University and shall have, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, Statutes, Regulations and Rules, such powers and duties as may be determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time. (b) He may, in an emergency, which in his opinion requires immediate action, take such action as he may consider necessary and shall, as soon thereafter as possible, report his action to the authority or other body which in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter. (c) He shall have the power to create and fill posts temporarily for a period not exceeding six months, and shall, with the approval of the Rector, secure the services of experts on the basis of contract for a period not exceeding two years and shall report all such cases to the Board of Governors. (d) He shall have the power to detail any employee on any duty commensurate with his status, qualifications and experience or transfer any employee to an equivalent post and report his action for information to the Board of Governors. (e) He shall authorize expenditure in accordance with the budget and other guidelines, laid down by the Board of Governors from time to time. (f) He shall promote general efficiency and good order of the University and shall have all powers necessary to exercise control and enforce discipline over all Teachers, employees, research workers, students, scholars and trainees of the University. (g) He may delegate any of his powers to Vice-Presidents or any Teacher, officer or a committee and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him by the Board of Trustees or the Board of Governors. 14. Vice-Presidents.- (1) There may be one or more Vice-Presidents of the University. (2) The Vice-President shall be appointed by the Board of Governors on the recommendation of the President on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Board of Governors and exercise such powers as may be delegated to him by the President in consultation with the Rector. (3) The Vice-President shall perform such duties and functions as assigned by the President from time to time. 15. Other Officers. Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, the terms and conditions of service and powers and duties of other officers of the University shall be such as may be prescribed. CHAPTER IV AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY 16. Authorities. The following shall be the Authorities, namely:- (i) the Board of Trustees ; (ii) the Board of Governors ; (iii) the Academic Council ; (iv) the Board of Studies ; (v) the Selection Board ; (vi) the Finance and Planning Committee ; (vii) the University Discipline Committee ; and (viii) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 17. Board of Trustees.- (1) There shall be a Board of Trustees consisting of the following ex-officio members, namely: (i) Chancellor .. .. .. Chairman (ii) Pro-Chancellor (iii) Rector (iv) President (v) Sheikh of Al-Azhar, Cairo. (vi) Secretary-General, Rabita al-Alam-al-Islami. (vii) Chairman, International Islamic Charitable Foundation, Kuwait. (viii) Chief Justice, Supreme Court of Pakistan. (ix) Chief Justice, Federal Shariat Court, Pakistan. (x) Chairman, University Grants Commission, Pakistan. (xi) Director-General, ISESCO, Rabat. (xii) Secretary, Federal Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan. (xiii) Rector, Ummul Qura University, Makkah. (xiv) Rector, International Islamic University, Malaysia. (xv) Rector, Cairo University. (xvi) Rector, Al-Azhar University. (xvii) Rector, Muhammad Ibn Saud University, Riyadh. (xviii) Such other ex-officio members as may be elected by the Board of Trustees. (2) The following shall be the Founder Members of the Board of Trustees, namely: (i) General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq (Pakistan). (ii) Sh. Abdul Aziz ben Baz (Saudi Arabia). (iii) Dr. Abdullah Omer Nasif (Saudi Arabia). (iv) Dr. Muhammad Afzal (Pakistan). (v) Sheikh Yusuf Jasim Al-Hajji (Kuwait). (vi) Dr. Ahmed Mohammad Ali (Saudi Arabia). (vii) Dr. Hussain Hamid Hassan (Egypt). (viii) Prof. Khurshid Ahmad (Pakistan). (ix) Maulana Zafar Ahmad Ansari (Pakistan). (x) Dr. Ishaq Farhan (Jordan). (xi) Dr. Ahmad Amin Faud (Egypt). (xii) Dr. Muhammad Abdur Rahman al Bakr (U.A.E.) (xiii) Mr. Ahmed Bazi Yasin (Kuwait). (xiv) Dr. Tayyib Zainul Abidin (Sudan). (xv) Dr. Omar Jah (Gambia). (xvi) Prof. Dr. Sabahuddin Zaim (Turkey). (xvii) Sheikh Mohammad Al-Gazali A1 Sakka (Algeria). (xviii) Mr. Abdullah Ali Al-Mutawa (Kuwait). (xix) Maulana Abu Hassan al Nadvi (India). (xx) Dr. Muhammad Hamid Ullah (Paris). (xxi) Mr. Ibrahim Afandi (Saudi Arabia). (xxii) Mr. Saleh Kamil (Saudi Arabia). (3) The ordinary members of the Board of Trustees may elect outstanding scholars as ordinary members. (4) Whenever there is a vacancy in the list of Founder Members, the Board of Trustees shall elect an ordinary member in his place who shall hold office for three years from the date of his appointment. (5) One of the Vice-Presidents shall act as Secretary of the Board of Trustees who shall be appointed by the Rector in consultation with the President. (6) Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Board of Trustees shall be the supreme authority of the University in all matters and its decisions shall be final and binding. (7) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (6), the Board of Trustee shall exercise and perform the powers and functions hereinafter specified, namely:- (a) to formulate or approve the principal policies and the plans governing the activities of the University ; (b) to review and approve the creation of any component of the University, such as faculties, colleges, programmes, institutes, standing committees, councils and other administrative bodies necessary to assist or improve the working of the University ; (c) to consider annual reports and budget, submitted by the Rector, relating to the activities of the University and the execution of the plans of work and to direct the Rector to submit reports relating to any mater specified by the Board of Governors ; (d) to make arrangements for the financial stability of the University, for ensuring effectiveness of its future operations, the continuity and preservation of the autonomy of the University and academic freedom of the faculties in their educational and research activities ; (e) to create a Trust or Trusts for meeting developmental and recurring requirements of the University ; (f) to appoint from amongst its members such committees or sub-committees as may, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, lead to its more efficient and effective operation ; (g) to approve the recommendations of the Board of Governors on all affiliations and other similar arrangements through which institutions or individuals may become associated with the University ; (h) to appoint professors emeritus, to confer honorary degrees and other academic distinctions with the approval of the Chancellor ; (i) to take such initiatives as it may consider necessary or desirable for the efficient and effective management and functioning of the University so as to make the University an effective and intellectual instrument for educational advancement of the Ummah. (8) No act or proceeding of the Board of Trustees shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board of Trustees. 18. Meetings of the Board of Trustees.-(1) The Board shall meet at least once during a year for regular or scheduled meetings and may meet at any other time at which a special meeting thereof may be called by the Chancellor or requisitioned in writing by not less than five members of the Board of Trustees. (2) Not less than ten clear days, notice of a special meeting shall be given to the members of the Board of Trustees and the agenda of the meeting shall be restricted to the matters specified in the agenda to the annexed to such notice. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Trustees shall be one-third of its members, a fraction being counted as one. (4) The decisions of the Board shall be based on the majority vote of the members present and voting. (5) In the case of equality of votes, the Chairman shall have a second or casting vote. 19. Board of Governors.-(1) The Board of Governors shall have the following members, namely:- (i) Rector .. .. .. Chairman (ii) President .. .. .. Vice-Chairman. (iii) Chief Justice of the Federal Shariat Court or a Judge of the said Court nominated by the Chief Justice .. .. .. Member. (iv) Secretary, Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan .. .. .. Member. (v) Chairman, University Grants Commission, or his nominee not below the rank of a permanent Member of the Commission .. .. .. Members. (vi) One Vice-Chancellor of a Pakistani University to be nominated by the Chancellor .. .. .. Members. (vii) Three scholars of international repute in the domain of Islamics to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor in consultation with the Rector. .. .. .. Members. (viii) Three nominees of the Board of Trustees .. .. .. Members. (ix) One Vice-President appointed by the Rector in consultation with the President .. .. .. Secretary. (2) The members other than ex-Officio members, shall hold office for two years. 20. Meetings of the Board of Governors.- (1) The Board shall ordinarily meet once in three months but a special meeting may be called by the Rector at any time. (2) Not less than ten clear days notice of a special meeting shall be given to the members of the Board of Governors. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Governors shall be one-half of its members, a fraction being counted as one. (4) The decisions of the Board of Governors shall be based on the majority vote of the members present and voting. 21. Powers of the Board of Governors. (1) The Board of Governors shall function under the overall guidance of the Board of Trustees and shall have the powers to execute the policies laid down by it. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board of Governors shall exercise and perform the powers and functions hereinafter specified, namely: (a) to hold, control and administer the property, funds and resources of the University; (b) to act as custodian of the University assets, properties and funds, other than that of the Trust; (c) to regulate and govern the finances, accounts, investments, funds, loans, donations and appoint agents for financial purposes. (d) to consider and approve, on the advice of the Finance and Planning Committee of the University, the annual budget estimates and the revised budget estimates and to reappropriate funds from one head of the budget to the other, and to lay down guidelines or rules of business dealing with financial disbursement ; (e) to approve, vary or cancel contracts ; (f) to initiate or approve schemes for the realisation of the objectives of the University; (g) to determine the form, provide for custody and regulate the use of common seal of the University ; (h) to institute Profession ships, Associate and Assistant Professorships, research fellowships, and other teaching, research and administrative posts or to suspend or abolish them or convert them into other posts ; (i) to appoint Teachers, researchers and officers on the recommendations of the Selection Board; (j) to suspend, punish and remove from service the University employees whom it is empowered to appoint, in the manner prescribed after due enquiry and defence ; (k) to propose Statutes for submission to the Board of Trustees ; (l) to approve Regulations and Rules on the recommendations of the appropriate bodies ; (m) to appoint such individuals, committees or sub-committees and delegate such powers and assign such functions as may, in the opinion of the Board of the Governors, lead to its more efficient and effective operation ; and (n) to determine, regulate and administer all other matters concerning the University and to this end exercise all necessary powers not specifically mentioned in this Ordinance or the Statutes, the Regulations and the Rules. 22. Academic Council. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of, (i) the President, who shall be its Chairman ; (ii) the Vice­Presidents ; (iii) Directors­General ; (iv) the Deans ; (v) the Directors of Institutes ; (vi) the University Professors and Professors Emeritus ; (vii) two Teachers to be appointed by the Rector in consultation with the President ; and (viii) two eminent scholars to be nominated by the Board of Governors. (2) One of the Deans or a Director appointed by the President shall act as Secretary of the Academic Council. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council shall be one-half of the total number, of members a fraction being counted as one. 23. Powers and duties of the Academic Council.- (1) The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Statutes, have the power to lay down proper standards of instruction, research and examinations and to regulate and promote the academic life of the University. (2) The Academic Council shall advise the Board of Governors on academic matters and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to it by the Board of Governors and those prescribed by the Statutes. 24. Constitution, functions and powers of other Authorities. Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, the constitution, functions and powers of the Authorities for which no specific provision or insufficient provision has been made in this Ordinance shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 25. Appointment of Committees by the Authorities. The Board of Trustees, the Board of Governors and the Academic Council and any other Authority may, from time to time, appoint such standing, special or advisory committees as it may deem fit, and may also appoint to such committees persons who are not its members. 26. The academic and administrative staff. The academic and administrative staff of the University shall be selected with a view to achieve its stated objectives and the basic criteria for their selection shall be the highest standards of intellectual competence, integrity, efficiency and commitment to Islam. 27. Academic freedom. The academic staff of the University shall enjoy freedom of expression in their research and educational work in accordance with the objectives of the University. CHAPTER V STATUTES, REGULATIONS AND RULES 28. Statutes. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, Statutes may be made to regulate or prescribe all or any of the following matters namely:- (a) creation of institutes and faculties ; (b) service, pension and fringe benefits for University employees and terms and conditions of their service ; (c) conditions of appointment of Professors Emeritus and award of honorary degrees ; (d) efficiency and discipline of the University employees ; and (e) all other matters required to be regulated under the Statutes. (2)  of the Statutes shall be proposed by the Board of Governors for approval by the Board of Trustees which may approve them or refer them back for reconsideration. (3) No Statute shall be valid until it has been approved by the Board of Trustees. 29. Regulations. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Statutes, Regulations may be made for all or any of the following matters, namely :- (a) schemes of studies and research including the duration of courses, number of subjects or papers for examination ; (b) syllabi and courses of study and research programmes leading to degrees, diplomas or certificates ; (c) conduct and supervision of examinations, appointment of examiners and scrutiny and tabulation of results ; (d) determination of fees and other charges for admission to various courses ; (e) maintenance of discipline among students and schemes for their welfare ; (f) institution of fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals, honorarium and other financial assistance to students and research scholars ; (g) conduct of convocations and form of academic costumes ; and (h) all other academic matters which are to be or may be prescribed by Regulations. (2) The  regulations shall be approved by the Board of Governors in consultation with the Academic Councils. (3) No regulation shall be valid until it has been approved by the Board of Governors. 30. Rules. The Board of Governors may prescribe rules for implementation of Statutes or Regulations where so required under the Statutes and the Regulations or make rules to regulate any matter relating to the affairs of the University which under this Ordinance are not specifically required to be provided for by the Statutes or the Regulations. CHAPTER VI THE UNIVERSITY FUND 31. University Fund. (1) There shall be a University fund to which shall be credited income from any source including transfers from the Trust, fees, donations, bequests, endowments, contributions and grants. (2) The Board of Governors may establish special funds for specific institutions or projects. 32. Payments. All payments from the University fund shall be made in accordance with the approved budget or funds for services rendered to, or supplies received by, the University. 33. Accounts. The accounts of the University shall be maintained and audited once a year under financial rules to be prescribed by the Board of Governors in consultation with the Finance and Planning Committee. 34. Audit. All payments shall be made after pre-audit by a resident Audit Officer to be appointed by the Board of Governors. 35. Annual statement of accounts. The President shall submit each year a statement of expenditure and receipts of the University, duly audited by an external auditor appointed by the Board of Governors with his comments for consideration by the Board of Governors. CHAPTER VII GENERAL PROVISIONS 36. Retirement from service. An officer, Teacher or other employee of the University shall retire from service. (i) on such date, after he has completed twenty five years of service qualifying for pension or other retirement benefits as the competent authority may direct ; or (ii) where no direction is given under clause (1), on the completion of sixty years of his age. Explanation. In this section ‘competent authority’ means the appointing authority or a person duly authorised by the appointing authority in that behalf, not being a person lower in rank to the officer, Teacher or other employee concerned. 37. Opportunity to show cause. Except as otherwise provided, no officer, teacher on other employee of the University holding a permanent post shall be reduced in rank, or removed or compulsorily retired from service, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken. 38. Appeal to, and review by, the Board of Governors. (1) Where an order is passed punishing any officer (other than President). Teacher or other employee of the University or altering or interpreting to his disadvantage the prescribed terms or conditions of his service, he shall, where the order is passed by the President of any other officer or Teacher of the University, have the right to appeal to the Board of Governors, against the order, and, where the order is made by the Board have the right to apply to that Authority for review of that order. (2) The appeal or application for review shall be subject to the President who shall lay it before the Board of Governors with his views. 39. Pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund. The University shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed such pension, insurance, gratuity, provident fund and benevolent fund schemes as it may deem fit. 40. Commencement of term of office of members of Authorities. When a member of a newly constituted Authority is appointed or nominated his term of office as fixed under this Ordinance shall commence from such date as may be prescribed. 41. Filling of casual vacancies in Authorities. Any casual vacancy among the appointed or nominated member of any Authority shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by the person or the body who appointed or nominated the member whose place has become vacant and the person appointed or nominated to the vacancy shall be a member of such Authority for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. 42. Filling of vacancies in Authorities in certain circumstances. Where a vacancy in the membership of an Authority other than the Board of Trustees cannot be filled because of (a) the office the holder whereof, was to be a member of the Authority ex- Officio having ceased to exist ; (b) the organization, institution or other body, other than the University, having either ceased to exist or to function ; or (c) the occurrence of other circumstances in which it has become impracticable to fill the vacancy. The vacancy shall be filled in such manner as the Rector may direct. 43. Disputes about membership of Authorities, etc. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, a person nominated or appointed to any Authority shall cease to be a member of such Authority as soon as he ceased to hold the position by virtue of which he was nominated or appointed. (2) If a question arises whether any person is entitled to be a member of any Authority, the matter shall be referred to a committee consisting of the President, a member of the Board of Governors and a nominee of the Rector and the decision of this committee shall be final and binding. 44. Proceeding of Authorities not invalidated by vacancies. No act, proceedings, resolution or decision of any Authority shall be invalid by reason only of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of, or in the appointment or nomination of any member of, the Authority. 45. First Statutes. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, the Statutes set out in the Schedules shall be deemed to be the Statutes framed under section 28 and shall remain in force until they are amended or replaced by new Statutes framed in accordance with this Ordinance. 46. Bar of jurisdiction. No Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any proceeding, grant any injunction or make any order in relation to anything done in good faith or purported to have been done or intended to be done under this Ordinance. 47. Indemnity. No suit or legal proceedings shall lie against the Government, the University or any Authority, officer or employee of Government or the University or any person, in respect of anything which is done, or purported to have been done in good faith or is intended to, or has been done under this Ordinance. 48. Transitional provisions. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, the Board of Governors shall start functioning immediately after the promulgation of this Ordinance. 49. Repeal and savings. (1) The Islamic University Ordinance, 1980 (LI11 of 1980) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, (a) everything done, action taken, obligations or liabilities incurred, rights and assets acquired, persons appointed or authorised, jurisdiction or powers conferred, endowments, bequests, funds or trusts created, donations of grants made, scholarships, studentships, or exhibitions instituted, affiliations or privileges granted and orders issued under any of the provisions of the said Ordinance or the Statutes, the Regulations and the Rules made or deemed to have been made thereunder , shall, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or the Statutes, the Regulations or the Rules made under this Ordinance, be continued and, so far as may be, be deemed to have been authorised, conferred, created, made, instituted, granted and issued under this Ordinance. (b) any Statutes, Regulations or Rules made or deemed to have been made under the said Ordinance, shall, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, be deemed to be Statutes, Regulations or Rules made under this Ordinance having regard to the various matters which by this Ordinance have to be regulated or prescribed by Statutes, Regulations or Rules respectively, and shall continue to be in force, until they are repealed, rescinded or modified in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 50. Trust. (1) The Board of Trustees shall create a Trust with sufficient endowment in Pakistan and abroad in collaboration with International Islamic organizations, with similar objective to provide for financial back up and stability of the University. (2) The administration and management of the Trust shall vest in the Board of Trustees. (3) The accounts of the Trust shall be jointly operated by the Rector and the President. (4) The objectives of the Trust shall be (i) to provide financial support to the University ; (ii) to create an endowment for meeting the recurring and developmental expenditure of the University ; (iii) to encourage and receive donations, grants, bequests, gifts and contributions for attaining the objectives of the University ; and (iv) to adopt measures for promotion and development of the University and to do all such other things and acts as may be necessary. 51. Removal of difficulties. If any difficulty arises as to the first constitution or reconstitution of any Authority upon coming into force of this Ordinance or otherwise in giving effect to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Chancellor may, on the recommendation of the Rector, give appropriate directions to remove such difficulty. THE SCHEDULE THE FIRST STATUTES (See section 45) 1. The Faculties, Institutes and Academies.- (1) The University shall have the following faculties, institutes and academies, namely :- (i) Faculty of Shari'ah and Law; (ii) Faculty of Usul al Din; (iii) Faculty of Da'wah Wa al I'lam; (iv) Islamic Research Institute; (v) International Institute of Islamic Economics; (vi) Institute of Linguistics and Languages; (vii) Institute of Applied Sciences; (viii) Institute of Social Sciences; (ix) Institute of Education; (x) Shari'ah Academy; (xi) Academy for Da'wah and Training of Imams; (xii) Institute of Medicine and Health Sciences; (xiii) Institute of Engineering and Technology; and (xiv) such other faculties, institutes or teaching, research and training units as may be prescribed by Statutes. (2) Each Faculty, Institute, Academy or teaching, research and training unit shall cover such subject or group of subjects as may be prescribed. 2. Directors, Deans, etc., of Faculties, Institutes and Academies.- (1) Each Faculty shall be headed by a Dean while each Institute and Academy shall be headed by a Director or Director- General as may be prescribed. (2) A Dean, Director or Director-General shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees. (3) The duties, functions, duration and terms of appointment of Deans, Directors and Director- Generals shall be such as may be prescribed. 3. Statutes for Institutes, Academies etc- (1) The Statutes of the Islamic Research Institute, the International Institutes of Islamic Economics, the Shari'ah Academy and the Academy for Dawah and Training of Imams shall be such as prescribed in Annexures to the First Statutes. (2) They shall remain in force until amended or replaced in the prescribed manner. 4. Board of Studies.- (1) There shall be a separate Board of Studies for each subject or group of subjects, as may be prescribed by regulations. (2) Each Board of Studies shall consist of- (i) the Dean of the Faculty or Director-General or Director of the Institute or Academy; (ii) all Professors and Associate Professors in the Institute or Academy concerned; (iii) two University Teachers, other than Professors or Associate Professors, to be appointed by rotation in order of seniority by the Academic Council; (iv) three Teachers, other than University Teachers, to be appointed by the Board of Governors; and (v) one expert to be appointed by the President. (3) The term of office of members of the Board of Studies, other than ex-officio members, shall be two years. (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Studies shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (5) The Dean, Director-General or Director of the Faculty Institute or Academy shall be the Chairman and Convenor of the Board of Studies. (6) The functions of the Board of Studies shall be- (a) to advise the authorities on all academic matters connected with instruction, research and examination in the subject or subjects concerned; (b) to propose curricula and syllabi for all academic and training programmes; (c) to suggest a panel of names of examiners in the subject or subjects concerned; and (d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Regulations. 5. The Selection Board. (1) The Selection Board shall consist of- (i) the President .. .. .. Chairman. (ii) the Chief Justice, Federal Shariat Court, or a Judge of the Court nominated by him. .. .. .. Member. (iii) a Vice-Chancellor of a University in Pakistan to be nominated by the Chancello.r .. .. .. Member. (iv) the Whole-time-Member, University Grants Commission, Islamabad. .. .. .. Member. (v) one member of the Board of Governors, one specialist in the subject concerned and two other men of eminence to be appointed by the Board of Governors provided that non of them is an employee of the University. .. .. .. Member. (vi) the head of the teaching or research unit concerned and .. .. .. Member. (vii) one Vice-President to be nominated by the President .. .. .. Member/Secretary. (2) The members of the Selection Board, other than ex-officio members, shall hold office for two years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Selection Board shall be six. (4) No member of the Selection Board who is a candidate for the post to which appointment is to be made shall take part in the proceedings of the Selection Board. (5) In selecting candidates for the posts of Professors and Associate Professors, the Selection Board shall, co-opt or consult three experts in the subject concerned and, in selecting candidates for other teaching posts, two experts in the subject concerned, to be nominated by the President, from a standing list of experts of each subject approved by the Board of Governors on the recommendation of the Selection Board and revised from time to time. 6. Functions of the Selection Board.-(1) The Selection Board shall consider all applications for teaching and other posts received in response to an advertisement in case of direct appointments and shall recommended to the Board the names of suitable candidates for appointment to such posts. (2) The Selection Board may recommend to the Board of Governors the grant of a higher initial pay in a suitable case for reasons to be recorded. (3) The Selection Board may recommend to the Board of Governors the appointment of an eminently qualified person to a position in the University on terms and conditions which may differ in any particular case from those prescribed. (4) The Selection Board shall consider all cases of promotion of officers of the university and recommend to the Board of Governors the names of suitable candidates for such promotions. (5) In the event of an unresolved difference of opinion between the Selection Board and the Board of Governors, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Trustees whose decision shall be final. 7. The Finance and Planning Committee. (1) There shall be a Finance and Planning Committee consisting of (i) the President. .. .. .. Chairman. (ii) two nominees of the Board of Trustees. .. .. .. Member. (iii) a nominee of the Board of Governors. .. .. .. Member. (iv) the Whole-time-Member University Grants Commission. .. .. .. Member. (v) the Director-General of the Academy of Educational Planning & Management. .. .. .. Member. (vi) one Vice-President to be nominated by the President. .. .. .. Member/Secretary (2) The term of office of the members of the Committee, other than the ex-officio members, shall be two years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Finance and Planning Committee shall be four. 8. Functions of the Finance and Planning Committee. The functions of the Finance and Planning Committee shall be (a) to consider the annual statement of accounts and the annual and revised budget estimates and advise the Board of Governors thereon; (b) to review periodically the financial position of the university; (c) to advise the Board of Governors on all matters relating to planning, development, finance, investments and accounts of the university; (d) to prepare short­term and long­term academic development plans; (e) to prepare staff and resource development plans; and (f) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Statutes. 9. University Discipline Committee.- (1) The University Discipline Committee shall consist of three senior teachers to be nominated by the President, including the officer incharge of student affairs (by whatever name called) who shall also be its Secretary. (2) The Chairman of the Committee shall be nominated by the President from amongst the members of the Committee. (3) The term of office of the members of the Committee shall be two years. (4) The quorum for a meeting of the University Discipline Committee shall be three. (5) The functions of the committee shall be- (a) to deal with all inter­institute cases of discipline in the University; (b) to propose regulations relating to the conduct of university students, maintenance of discipline and breach of discipline; (c) to recommend to the President suspension, expulsion and rustication of students on the basis of the inquiry conducted under the Rules or Regulations; and (d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed. Annex I ISLAMIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE 1. Establishment of the Institute.- The Islamic Research Institute, hereafter in this Annex referred to as the Institute, established under Notification No. F. 15-1059-E-IV, dated the 10th March, 1960, and referred to in section 43 of the Islamic University Ordinance, 1980 (LIII of 1980), shall be reconstituted in the manner described in these Statutes. 2. Objectives and Functions of the Institute.- The objectives and functions of the Institute shall be to- (i) act as the research arm of the University; (ii) develop and disseminate methodology for research in various fields of Islamic Learning; (iii) to interpret the teachings of Islam in such a way as to bring out its dynamic character in the context of the intellectual and scientific progress of the modern world; (iv) identity and study contemporary problems of the world of Islam; (v) contribute to the revival of Islamic heritage; (vi) publish monographs, research reports, research journals and such other research material as may be considered necessary for the promotion of knowledge of Islam; (vii) appoint study groups for identifying issues facing the Muslim society; (viii) serve as a clearing house of knowledge on various aspects of Islam; (ix) organize seminars, conferences, symposia and work-shops to promote harmonious understanding amongst various schools of thought in Muslim societies; (x) perform such other functions as may be necessary for realization of its objectives. 3. The Council.- (1) There shall be a Council of the Institute consisting of- (i) the Chairman to be appointed by the Board of Governors. .. .. .. Chairman (ii) the Chairman, Council of Islamic Ideology .. .. .. Member. (iii) the Chairman, University Grants Commission or a Member of the Commission nominated by him. .. .. .. Member. (iv) a Judge of the Shariat Bench of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan. .. .. .. Member. (v) The Chief Justice, Federal Shariat Court or a Judge to be nominated by him. .. .. .. Member. (vi) the Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs. .. .. .. Member. (vii) one nominee of the Board of Trustees. .. .. .. Member. (viii) one nominee of the Board of Governors. .. .. .. Member. (ix) two eminent scholars to be nominated by the Rector. .. .. .. Member. (x) one Vice-President to be nominated by the President. .. .. .. Member. (xi) the Director-General of the Institute. .. .. .. Member. (2) The members, other than ex-officio members, of the Council shall hold office for a period of two years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Council shall be one-half of the total number of members fraction being counted as one. (4) The Director-General shall appoint an officer of the Institute to act as Secretary of the Council. (5) The meetings of the Council shall be convened ordinarily at ten day’s notice specifying the time, date and place for the meeting and supplying the agenda with working papers, but a meeting in emergency may be called at a notice of not less than three days. 4. Powers and functions of the Council.- (1) Under the general supervision and control of the Board of Trustees, the Council shall be the executive body of the Institute and shall, subject to the provisions of these Statutes, exercise general supervision over the affairs of the Institute. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Council shall have the powers to- (i) exercise executive and financial control over the Institute and to manage its properties and assets; (ii) approve the annual budget estimates and annual statements of accounts of the Institute and to make bye- laws for the financial control and proper administration of the Institute; (iii) frame Rules for regulating the affairs and, carrying out the objectives of the Institute and in particular, for- (a) conducting its own proceedings; (b) the constitution of committees or sub-committees (iv) lay down and define the functions of the various constituent parts of the Institute, its departments, committees and sections and to define the functions and duties of its functionaries; (v) develop and promote collaboration with other appropriate bodies for the development of educational material in various disciplines, particularly human and social sciences with Islamic perspective; (vi) appoint the officers and staff of the Institute and determine the terms and conditions of their service as may be prescribed; (vii) secure the services of experts on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Institute and the experts or the Institute and the agency or organization from which the services of the experts are secured; (viii) perform such other functions as may be necessary for the realization of its approved targets and objectives. 5. The Chairman of the Council.- (1) The Chairman of the Council shall be appointed by the Board of Governors for such period and on such terms and conditions as the Board may determine. (2) The Chairman of the Council shall have the powers to convene the meetings of the Board. (3) The meetings of the Council shall be presided over by the Chairman, and in his absence, by a member to be elected by the members present to preside over that meeting. (4) The Chairman shall perform such functions as may be entrusted to him by the Board of Governors and the Council. 6. Director-General.- (1) There shall be a Director-General of the Institute, who shall be appointed by the Board of Governors for such period and on such terms and conditions as the Board of Trustees may, from time to time, determine. (2) The Director-General of the Institute shall be the executive and academic head of the Institute and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the Chairman or the Council. (3) The Council may, from time to time, delegate to the Dean of the Institute such powers and functions as it may consider necessary for the purpose of these Statutes. (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Director-General shall have the powers- (i) to make all appointments to posts as may be prescribed; (ii) to accord formal sanction to the expenditure provided for in the sanctioned budget and to reappropriate funds within the same major heads of expenditure; (iii) to appoint, from time to time, Committees or sub-committees for specified periods with clearly defined functions and terms of reference for assisting him in academic and administrative affairs of the Institute. 7. Funds, audit, etc.- (1) The funds of the Institute shall comprise the following, namely:- (i) Grants made by the Board of Trustees directly or through the University; (ii) grants, if any, made by the Government of Pakistan or other agencies; (iii) donations, gifts and endowments received by the Institute; (iv) income from other sources such as sale-proceeds and royalties on publications of the Institute, fees and remunerations. (2) No expenditure shall be made from the Fund unless a bill for its payment has been audited by a qualified auditor to be appointed by and in a manner approved by the Rector. (3) The accounts of the Institute shall be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Council and shall be audited once a year by an auditor appointed by the Council. (4) An Annual report on the activities and performance of the Institute shall be submitted by the Director-General for consideration of the Council as soon as possible after the close of each financial year alongwith the Annual Statement of Accounts and audit report thereon and the Council shall submit them alongwith its comments to the Board of Trustees. Annex II INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ISLAMIC ECONOMICS 1. Establishment of the Institute.-There shall be an Institute to be called the International Institute of Islamic Economics, hereafter in this Annex referred to as the Institute. 2. Objectives and functions of the Institute.-The Institute shall- (a) organize teaching of economics, Islamic economics and related disciplines and conduct advanced studies and research in the field of economics and allied disciplines and evaluation of Islamic economics at undergraduate, graduate, doctoral and post-doctoral levels. (b) promote cooperation with other institutes and organisations in the field of economics and allied disciplines and Islamic economic through seminars, scholarships, stipends and bursaries and in any other manner which the Council of the Institute, hereafter in this Annex referred to as the Council, may approve. (c) organize studies, surveys, collection of data in the field of economics and allied disciplines from the Muslim world and publish the results of this work for the larger benefit of the Ummah; and (d) adopt such other measures to achieve its objectives as the Council may determine from time to time. 3. There shall be a Council consisting of- (i) a Chairman to be appointed by the Board of Trustees.. .. .. Chairman. (ii) a representative of the University Grants Commission not below the rank of member of the Commission .. .. .. Member. (iii) a representative of the President of the below the rank of a Professor.. Member. (iv) two experts to be nominated by the Board of Trustees.. .. .. Member. (v) three experts to be nominated by the Rector in consultation with the Chairman of the Council.. .. .. Member. (vi) One Vice-President to be nominated by the President.. .. .. Member. (vii) the Director General of the Institute .. .. .. Member. (2) The members of the Council, other than ex-officio members, shall hold office for two years. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Council shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. 4. Powers and functions of the Council.-(1) The Council shall be the executive body of the Institute and shall, subject to the provisions of these Statutes, exercise general supervision over the affairs of the Institute. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Council shall have the power to- (a) exercise executive and financial control over the administration of the Institute and to manage its properties and assets; (b) to prepare the annual budget estimates and annual statement of accounts of the Institute and to make bye-laws for financial control and proper administration of the Institute and submit it to the Board of Trustees for approval; (c) lay down and define the functions of the various constituent parts of the Institute its departments, committees and sections and to define the functions and duties of its functionaries; (d) sanction schemes of undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral programmes of teaching and research in economics with special emphasis on Islamic economics leading to the award of degrees in accordance with, and under the conditions prescribed by, Regulations; (e) develop and approve non-degree programmes of specialized teaching or training leading to the award of diplomas or certificates in areas of Islamic economics to be prescribed by Regulations; (f) approve schemes of faculty development for specialization in economics, Islamic economics and allied disciplines; (g) develop and promote collaboration with other appropriate bodies for the development of courses in Islamic economics for introduction as a regular discipline at various levels of education in the country and abroad and coordinate teaching and research in Islamic economics at international level; (h) secure the services of experts on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Institute and the experts or the Institute and the agency or organization from which the services of the experts are secured; (i) lay down the functions and rules of business and procedure for the various organizations and bodies of the institute; (j) issue directions on administrative and financial matters connected with or incidental to the provisions of this Chapter; and (k) perform such other functions as may be necessary for the realization of its approved targets and objectives. 5. Chairman of the Council.- (1) The Chairman of the Council shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees for such period and on such terms and conditions as the Board may determine. (2) The Chairman of the Council shall, when present, preside over the meetings of the Council. (3) In the absence of the Chairman of the Council, meetings of the Council may be presided at by one of its members to be appointed by the members present. (4) The Chairman of the Council shall perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by the Board of Trustees or the Council. 6. Director-General.- (1) There shall be a Director-General of the Institute to be appointed by the Council on such terms and conditions as it may determine. (2) The Director-General of the Institute shall be the executive and academic head of the Institute and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the Chairman or the Council. (3) The Council may, from time to time, delegate to the Director General of the Institute such powers and functions as it may consider necessary for the purpose of these Statutes; (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Director-General shall have the powers:- (i) to make all appointments to posts as may be prescribed; (ii) to accord formal sanction to the expenditure provided for in the sanctioned budget and to reappropriate funds; and (iii) to appoint from time to time committees or sub-committees for specified periods with clearly defined functions and terms of reference for assisting him in academic and administrative affairs of the Institute. 7. Funds and reports of the Institute.- (1) The Institute shall have a Fund to which shall be credited all grants and contributions made by the University or received through gifts and endowments, sale proceeds and royalties on publications, fees and remunerations or from any other source. (2) Grants and other expenditure to be made and incurred by the Institute under these statutes shall be disbursed out of the Fund and no expenditure shall be made from the Fund unless a bill for its payment has been audited by a qualified auditor to be appointed by and in a manner approved by the Council. (3) The accounts of the Institute shall be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed and shall be audited once a year by an auditor appointed by the Council. 8. Annual statement of accounts to be submitted to the Board of Trustees.- The annual statement of accounts and audit report thereon shall be submitted by the auditor for consideration of the Council which shall submit it alongwith its comments to the Board of Trustees. Annex III SHARI’AH ACADEMY 1. Establishment of the Academy.-There shall be an Academy to be called the Shari’ah Academy. 2. Objectives and functions of the Academy.-The Academy shall - (i) arrange pre-service and in-service training in Islamic Shariah, hold conferences, seminars, symposia and workshops ; (ii) develop methodologies for training, research and advanced studies in Islamic law and allied disciplines; (iii) serve as a clearinghouse of information; (iv) publish monographs, reports, journals and such other material as may be considered necessary; and (v) perform such other functions as may be necessary for realization of its objectives. 3. Council of the Academy.-(1) There shall be a Council of the Academy consisting of- (i) Chairman, to be appointed by the Board of Governors; (ii) Director-General of the Academy; (iii) two representatives of the Board of Trustees; (iv) one representative of the Board of Governors; (v) Chief Justice of the Federal Shariat Court; (vi) a member of the Shariat Bench of the Supreme Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan ; (vii) one Vice-Chancellor of a University in Pakistan, to be nominated by the Chancellor; (viii) Chairman, University Grants Commission, or a member of the said Commission, to be nominated by the Chairman; (ix) Two experts in Islamic law, to be nominated by the Ministry of Justice; (x) Secretary to the Government of Pakistan in the Ministry of Justice; and (xi) a Vice-President, to be nominated by the President. (2) Members, other than ex-officio members, of the Council shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Council shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (4) The meeting of the Council shall be convened ordinarily at ten days' notice specifying the time, date and place for the meeting and supplying the agenda with working papers, but a meeting in emergency may be called at a notice of not less than three days. (5) The Director-General shall appoint a staff member of the Academy to act as Secretary of the Council. 4. Powers and functions of the Council.- (1) Under the general supervision and control of the Board of Trustees, the Council shall be the executive body of the Academy and shall, subject to the provisions of these Statutes, exercise general supervision over the affairs of the Academy; (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Council shall have the powers to- (i) exercise executive and financial control over the Academy and to manage its properties and assets: (ii) approve the annual budget estimates and annual statement of accounts of the Academy and to make bye-laws for financial control and proper administration of the Academy ; (iii) frame rules for regulating the affairs and carrying out the objectives of the Academy and, in particular, for- (a) conducting its own proceedings; (b) constitution of committees or sub-committees and the conduct of their business; (iv) lay down the functions of various departments of the Academy and define the duties of their functionaries; (v) collaborate with other appropriate bodies for developmental purposes and sharing of intellectual and physical resources; (vi) secure the services of experts on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Academy and the expert concerned or the Academy and the agency or organization from which the services of the experts are secured: and (vii) perform such other functions as may be necessary for the realization of its approved targets and objectives. 5. Director-General.- (1) There shall be a Director-General of the Academy, who shall be a whole-time officer appointed by the Board of Governors on such terms and conditions as the Board may determine. (2) The Director-General shall be the executive and academic head of the Academy and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be determined by the Council. (3) The Council may, from time to time, delegate to the Director-General such powers and functions as it may deem fit for the purpose of these Statutes. (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the fore-going provisions, the Director-General shall have the powers- (i) to make all appointments to such posts as may be prescribed; (ii) to accord formal sanction to the expenditure provided for in the sanctioned budget and to re­appropriate funds within heads of expenditure ; (iii) to appoint committees or sub-committees for such specified periods and purposes as may be necessary to advance the objectives of the Academy and to assist him in the discharge of the academic and administrative functions of the Academy. 6. Funds, audit, etc.- (1) The funds of the Academy shall consist of- (i) grants made by the Board of Trustees, directly or through the University ; (ii) grants made by the Government or other public or private agencies ; (iii) donations, gifts and endowments received by the Academy; and (iv) income from all other sources, such as, sale proceeds and royalties on publications of the Academy, fees charged from trainees and remunerations received for services rendered. (2) No expenditure shall be made from the funds of the Academy unless a bill for its payment has been audited by a qualified auditor to be appointed by and in a manner approved by the Council. (3) The accounts of the Academy shall be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Council and shall be audited once a year by an auditor appointed by the Council. 7. Annual Report.- (1) An annual report on the activities and performance of the Academy shall be submitted for consideration of the Council as soon as possible after the close of each financial year, alongwith the annual statement of accounts and the audit report thereon. (2) The Council shall submit the statements and reports, together with its comments, to the Board of Governors and the Board of Trustees. Annex IV ACADEMY FOR DA’WAH AND TRAINING OF IMAMS 1. Establishment of the Academy.- There shall be an Academy for Da'wah and Training of Imams. 2. Objectives and functions of the Academy.-The Academy shall :- (a) plan and develop educational, training and research programmes of Da'wah; (b) organize programmes for the training of Imams; (c) develop methods and techniques in Da'wah and in training of Imams; (d) design and develop literature on Da'wah; (e) plan and develop audio­visual material for use in Da'wah and training of Imams; (f) seek cooperation and coordination with other institutions with similar objectives in and outside Pakistan; (g) organize symposia, seminars, workshops, conferences, tarbiyah programmes, exchange of scholars, orientation courses and in­service training programmes; (h) develop a resource centre on Da'wah; (i) publish monographs, reports, surveys, journals, booklets, books and such other materials as may be considered necessary to achieve the objectives of the Academy ; (j) establish regional centres to promote the objectives of the Academy; and (k) perform such other functions as may be determined by the Council to achieve the objectives of the Academy. 3. The Council.- (1) There shall be a Council of the Academy consisting of- (i) a Chairman, to be appointed by the Board of Governors.. .. .. Chairman. (ii) the Chairman, Council of Islamic Ideology .. .. .. Member. (iii) the Chairman, University Grants Commission or a member of Commission nominated by him .. .. .. Member. (iv) the Chief Justice, Federal Shariat Court, or a Judge to be nominated by him .. .. .. Member. (v) the Secretary , Ministry of Religious Afairs or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Secretary.. .. .. Member. (vi) the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broad- casting or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Secretary .. .. .. Member. (vii) a nominee of the Board of Trustees .. .. .. Member. (viii) a nominee of the Board of Governors .. .. .. Member. (ix) two eminent scholars to be nominated by the Rector .. .. .. Member. (x) a Vice­President to be nominated by the President; and .. .. .. Member. (xi) the Director-General of the Academy .. .. .. Member. (2) The members of the Council, other than ex-officio members, shall hold office for a period of two years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Council shall be one-half of the total number of members, a fraction being counted as one. (4) The Director-General shall appoint an officer of the Academy to act as the Secretary of the Council. (5) A meeting of the Council shall be convened ordinarily at ten days notice specifying the time, date and place for the meeting and supplying the agenda with working papers, but a meeting in emergency may be called at a notice of not less than three days. 4. Powers and functions of the Council.-(1) Under the general supervision and control of the Board of Trustees, the Council shall be the executive body of the Academy and shall, subject to the provisions of these Statutes, exercise general supervision over the affairs of the Academy. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Council shall have the powers to : (a) exercise executive and financial control over the Academy; (b) approve the annual budget estimates and annual statement of accounts of the Academy and to make by-laws for financial control and proper administration of the Academy; (c) frame rules for regulating the affairs and carrying out the objectives of the Academy and in particular, for the following purposes: (i) conducting its own proceedings; and (ii) constitution of committees or sub-committees and the conduct of their business; (d) lay down the functions of various departments of the Academy and define their duties and functions; (e) collaborate with other appropriate bodies with similar objectives for developmental purposes and sharing of intellectual and physical resources; (f) appoint academic and administrative staff of the Academy and determine the terms and conditions of their services; (g) secure the services of experts on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Academy and the expert concerned, or the Academy and the agency or organization from which the services of the experts are secu red; and (h) perform such other functions as may be necessary for the realization of its objectives. 5. Director-General.-(1) There shall be a Director-General of the Academy, who shall be a whole-time officer appointed by the Board of Governors, on such terms and conditions as it may determine. (2) The Director-General shall be the executive and academic head of the Academy and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be determined by the Council. (3) The Council may, from time to time, delegate to the Director-General such powers and functions as it may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of these Statutes. (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Director-General shall have the powers.- (a) to make all appointments to such posts as may be prescribed ; (b) to accord formal sanction to the expenditure provided for in the sanctioned budget and to reappropriate funds within the major head of expenditure ; and (c) to appoint committees or sub-committees for such specified periods and purposes as may be necessary to promote the objectives of the Academy and to assist him in the discharge of the academic and administrative functions of the Academy. 6. Funds and Accounts.-(1) The funds of the Academy shall consist of (a) grants made by the Board of Trustees ; (b) grants made by the Government or other public or private agencies ; (c) donations, gifts and endowments revived by the Academy ; and (d) income from all other sources such as sale proceeds and royalties on publications of the Academy, fees charged from trainees and remuneration received for services rendered. (2) No expenditure shall be made from the funds of the Academy unless a bill for its payment has been audited by a qualified auditor to be appointed in a manner approved by the Council. (3) The accounts of the Academy shall be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Council and shall be audited once a year by an auditor appointed by the Council. 7. Annual report.- An annual report on the activities and performance of the Academy shall be submitted for consideration of the Council, as soon as possible, after the close of each financial year alongwith the annual statement of accounts and the audit report thereon and the Council shall submit the statements and reports, together with its comments, to the Board of Governors and the Board of Trustees.